



                         THE GRENADIER GUARDS
                          IN THE GREAT WAR OF
                               1914-1918




  [Illustration]

                      MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED

                  LONDON · BOMBAY · CALCUTTA · MADRAS
                               MELBOURNE

                         THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

                      NEW YORK · BOSTON · CHICAGO
                        DALLAS · SAN FRANCISCO

                   THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, LTD.

                                TORONTO

  [Illustration:

    _Speaight Ltd photographers_      _Emery Walker ph. sc._

  _Captain H.R.H. The Prince of Wales, K.G., M.C., &c._
  ]




                                  THE
                           GRENADIER GUARDS
                          IN THE GREAT WAR OF
                               1914-1918

                                  BY

                            LIEUT.-COLONEL
                 THE RIGHT HON. SIR FREDERICK PONSONBY
                        (LATE GRENADIER GUARDS)

                        WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY

                   LIEUT.-GENERAL THE EARL OF CAVAN

                      _MAPS BY MR. EMERY WALKER_

                           IN THREE VOLUMES
                               VOL. III

                      MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED
                      ST. MARTIN'S STREET, LONDON

                                 1920




                               COPYRIGHT




                               CONTENTS


                            CHAPTER XXVIII

                                                            PAGE

    FEBRUARY, M2ARCH 1918 (4TH BATTALION)                       1


                             CHAPTER XXIX

    APRIL, MAY, JUNE 1918 (1ST, 2ND, AND 3RD BATTALIONS)      16


                              CHAPTER XXX

    APRIL 1-14 (4TH BATTALION)                                32


                             CHAPTER XXXI

    APRIL 14 TO NOVEMBER 11 (4TH BATTALION)                   53


                             CHAPTER XXXII

    JULY AND AUGUST (1ST, 2ND, AND 3RD BATTALIONS)            59


                            CHAPTER XXXIII

    SEPTEMBER (1ST, 2ND, AND 3RD BATTALIONS)                 104


                             CHAPTER XXXIV

    OCTOBER (1ST, 2ND, AND 3RD BATTALIONS)                   136


                             CHAPTER XXXV

    NOVEMBER (1ST, 2ND, AND 3RD BATTALIONS)                  166


                             CHAPTER XXXVI

    MARCH INTO GERMANY (GUARDS DIVISION)                     191


                            CHAPTER XXXVII

    THE 7TH (GUARDS) ENTRENCHING BATTALION                   200


                            CHAPTER XXXVIII

    THE RESERVE BATTALION                                    206


                             CHAPTER XXXIX

    THE BAND                                                 212


                              CHAPTER XL

    REGIMENTAL FUNDS AND ASSOCIATIONS                        215


                              APPENDICES

       I. THE CASUALTIES IN THE GUARDS DIVISION                 229

      II. THE TITLE "GRENADIERS"                               230

     III. OFFICERS KILLED IN ACTION OR DIED OF WOUNDS         234

      IV. NOMINAL ROLL OF W.O.'S, N.C.O.'S, AND MEN WHO
            HAVE BEEN KILLED IN ACTION, OR WHO HAVE DIED
            OF WOUNDS OR DISEASE IN THE EUROPEAN WAR OF
            1914-1918                                          243

       V. OFFICERS WOUNDED                                      272

      VI. REWARDS--OFFICERS                                    284

     VII. REWARDS--WARRANT AND NON-COMMISSIONED
            OFFICERS AND MEN                                  296

    VIII. "MENTIONED IN DESPATCHES"                          318

      IX. "CERTIFICATES FOR GALLANTRY"                         328

       X. PROMOTIONS TO COMMISSIONED RANK                       331


    INDEX TO NAMES OF OFFICERS                               335




                             ILLUSTRATIONS


    Captain H.R.H. The Prince of Wales, K.G., M.C., etc. _Frontispiece_

                                                           FACING PAGE

    Brigadier-General C. R. Champion de Crespigny, D.S.O.           50

    Brigadier-General B. N. Sergison-Brooke, D.S.O.                100

    Brigadier-General Lord Henry Seymour, D.S.O.                   150

    Brigadier-General A. F. A. N. Thorne, D.S.O.                   200


                                 MAPS

    Fourth Battalion at La Couronne--Position on April 13, 1918     42

    Attack on Premy Chapel, September 27, 1918                     114

    Operations, October 11-14, 1918                                142

    Operations, October 20, 1918                                   164

    Operations, November 1-11, 1918                                178




                            CHAPTER XXVIII

                 FEBRUARY, MARCH 1918 (4TH BATTALION)


[Sidenote: 4th Batt. Feb. 1918.]

On February 12 the 4th Battalion left the Guards Division, and was
played out by the drums of the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd Battalions Grenadier
Guards, the pipers of the 2nd Battalion Scots Guards, and the band of
the Irish Guards. Brigadier-General Lord Henry Seymour watched the
Battalion march by, and congratulated Lieut.-Colonel Pilcher on its
smart appearance.

Thus the newly formed 4th Guards Brigade joined the Thirty-First
Division. On the 14th Major-General Sir Charles Fergusson, Commanding
the Thirteenth Corps, inspected the Battalion, and expressed himself
very pleased with its appearance on parade. On the 17th the Battalion
relieved the Durham Light Infantry in the line near Arleux Loop,
and was subjected to a slight shelling. This was the new Brigade's
first tour in the trenches, and the 4th Battalion was the first of
the three Battalions to go into the front line. The line taken over
was an example of the new system of holding the front in depth. The
Brigade frontage, 2000 yards in length, was held by one Battalion,
and constituted the outpost line. Held very lightly by posts at long
intervals, it was supported some 1000 yards in rear by a trench, known
as the Arleux Loop, South and North, where the Battalion Headquarters
were situated together with one company in reserve. Lieut.-Colonel
Pilcher was aware that the arrival of a fresh Battalion in the line
was likely to be observed by the enemy, and that therefore a raid was
highly probable. If any confirmation of this theory was required it had
already been supplied by a prisoner, who had been captured before the
relief, and had stated that the enemy suspected the presence of the
Guards Division, and intended shortly to make a raid to confirm the
fact. Nothing, however, was observed either to indicate the exact time
or the locality; in fact, everything seemed normal, and the officer
commanding the 2nd Battalion Irish Guards went round the posts with
Lieut.-Colonel Pilcher in the usual way in order to make the necessary
arrangements for the relief the next morning.

From the evidence of the single surviving prisoner, who was captured,
it was clear that the Germans had planned and rehearsed every detail
of the coming raid with great thoroughness. Practice trenches, made
from aeroplane photographs, had been dug in Beaumont, and the raiders
were minutely trained in their duties. All the men who were to take
part in the raid had been withdrawn from the line for three weeks,
and had been well fed and cared for. They were the pick of the 469th
German Infantry Regiment, and had been selected on account of their
physique and proved courage. Their equipment was of high quality,
with every detail carefully thought out; it consisted of a short,
light rifle of 1917 pattern with a leather sling, a trench dagger, an
automatic pistol, wire-cutters, a watch, and a canvas bag for carrying
stick-bombs.

The raid, which had been planned by the Regimental Staff of the 469th
Regiment, was carried out in two sections, each consisting of 1
officer and 28 other ranks, in all about 60. At 8 P.M. a concentrated
bombardment was put down by the enemy from Oak Post on the left to
Tommy Post on the right, and the bombardment was so intense that
portions of our trenches were completely obliterated. An S.O.S. signal
went up some way to the left of Oak Post, and our barrage came down
with great promptitude opposite that part of the line; thus valuable
time was lost in having it transferred to where the raid was actually
taking place.

Shortly after the enemy's barrage was put down, the men in No. 8
Post saw a strong party of Germans advancing down Brandy Trench from
Tee Trench, and a fierce fight commenced. Seeing they were greatly
outnumbered, our men slowly closed in on No. 7 Post. After the
bombardment began, Captain Benson at No. 2 Company Headquarters sent
Second Lieutenant Wrixon to ascertain what was happening, and this
officer, after passing through the enemy's barrage, came up just as
No. 8 Post was joining No. 7. He at once took charge of both posts,
and concentrated his men in Beer Trench, which he determined to
hold to the last. He now had 2 N.C.O.'s and 12 men to oppose to the
raiding party. The Germans on reaching Brandy Trench split up into
two parties; one party continued to bomb up the trench while another,
which comprised the majority, rushed across the open towards Beer
Trench, with the obvious intention of cutting off these posts. Private
Fletcher, No. 1 of the Lewis-gun team in No. 7 Post, saw them coming,
and at once turned his gun on them. Several dropped, and the remainder
fled, carrying their wounded with them. No sooner was this party
disposed of than Lieutenant Wrixon saw a fresh group of men, advancing
stealthily down the trench in front of him. Instead of waiting for
them, he determined to attack them, and advancing down the trench he
shot the first man he met dead with his revolver. His next opponent at
once flung a bomb at him, which burst within a few feet, only slightly
wounding him. Private Coles, who was just behind him, shot the man dead
with his rifle at point-blank range. Then a bugle was blown, and the
raiders disappeared. During this fight the Germans attempted an old
ruse by calling out in perfect English: "Take off your gas respirators
and return to your support line." Some of the men repeated these
instructions under the impression they came from one of their officers,
but Second Lieutenant Wrixon yelled at the men, and countermanded the
spurious order.

At the commencement of the fight, when No. 8 Post was falling back on
No. 7, Private Taylor, who had been sent back to No. 8 Post to fetch
some bombs, which had been left behind, ran straight into the arms of
a party of Germans, and was taken prisoner. He was ordered on pain of
death to lead the Germans to No. 14 Post, and feigned to be willing to
do so, when the raiders suddenly changed their minds, and told him to
lead them back to their own lines. He at once acquiesced, but instead
of doing so, led them to the strongest post in our line. When he knew
he was within a few yards of Nos. 7 and 8 Posts, he shouted a warning
to the garrison, and threw himself on the ground. His warning was heard
by his comrades, who at once hurled bombs in the direction of his
voice, and the Germans fled, abandoning their prisoner. Unfortunately,
one of our bombs wounded Private Taylor, but he was finally rescued by
Private Cunliffe, a stretcher-bearer who had already behaved with great
gallantry, bringing in the wounded under heavy shell-fire.

Meanwhile a totally distinct fight took place at Nos. 13 and 14
Posts, generally known as Alton Post, where there was a machine-gun
protected by a bombing-post, under Lieutenant W. B. Ball. It happened
that a party of Royal Engineers, under an officer, was working at the
machine-gun dug-out that night. The machine-gun itself was knocked out
by the first few shells of the barrage, and a small party of Germans
immediately afterwards emerged from the darkness, and rushed at the
post. Corporal Horan, who was in charge of the bombing-post, disabled
three of them with well-directed bombs, but one very tall German,
followed by some more, broke through, and proceeded to throw bombs
down the dug-out. It was all done in a moment, and the officer of the
Royal Engineers, who was in the dug-out, having just escaped the first
bomb, ran round to another exit, when he narrowly missed a second one,
before he got out into the open. Meanwhile, Private Moore, a Grenadier
attached to the Royal Engineers, closed with the leading German, and
was stabbed to death. Corporal Horan then came up, and shot the tall
German dead. Presumably the leaders of the party had all been accounted
for, as the remainder turned and disappeared into the darkness.

It is difficult to estimate with any accuracy the enemy's casualties,
since there is no doubt they were able to carry away most of their
wounded and even their dead. It is only possible, therefore, to state
the actual number of dead and wounded left in our lines. These were: 2
killed and 5 wounded, 4 of whom subsequently died. The casualties in
the Grenadiers were: 2 killed, 2 died of wounds, and 5 wounded. It was
a distinctly unfortunate raid for the Germans, who had taken infinite
pains to make it a success; yet not only had they suffered heavy loss,
but they had failed to obtain an identification of any kind either in
the nature of a prisoner or a bit of equipment. With 2 officers and
nearly 60 men, they imagined they would make short work of 12 men under
one officer, but they had the misfortune to meet some tough fighters,
who were anxious to come to close quarters with them.

Brigadier-General Lord Ardee two days later received the following
message:

   The Corps Commander requests that you will convey to the
   officers and men of the 4th Battalion Grenadier Guards his
   high appreciation of the gallant and successful resistance put
   up by the garrison of Arleux Post on the night of February
   19-20. He wishes also to congratulate the Thirty-first
   Division on having completely repulsed for the fourth time
   in succession during the last two months determined and
   elaborately prepared attempts to penetrate their lines.

On the 21st the 4th Battalion was relieved by the 2nd Battalion Irish
Guards, and retired to Ecurie Camp for four days' rest, after which it
returned to the front trenches. On the 23rd the sad news of the death
of Lieutenant Ludlow was received. He had been universally popular as
Quartermaster of the Battalion, and had only just retired to take up an
appointment at Chelsea Hospital, when he was killed by a bomb dropped
by a German aeroplane during a raid on London.

[Sidenote: 4th Batt. March 1918.]

On March 21 the 4th Battalion was in billets in the
Cheiers-Guestreville-Bethencourt area, and the Brigade as part of the
Thirty-first Division was in General Headquarters Reserve, when an
order arrived, warning all Battalions to be ready to move the next
morning. At 10 a.m. the 4th Battalion started off in buses, and with
the rest of the Brigade moved _via_ St. Pol and Doulens to Blairville.
It was now to take part in ten strenuous days' fighting, digging, and
marching, in open warfare of the kind associated with the retreat from
Mons in 1914, and to forgo the comparative comforts of an established
trench line. The following officers took part in these operations:

    Lieut.-Colonel W. S. Pilcher, D.S.O.      Commanding Officer.
    Capt. C. R. Gerard, D.S.O.                Adjutant.
    Capt. M. Chapman, M.C.                    Intelligence Officer.
    Capt. I. H. Ingelby                       Quartermaster.
    Lieut. G. W. Selby-Lowndes                Transport Officer.
    Lieut. G. R. Green                        Attached to B.H.Q.
    Capt. H. H. Sloane-Stanley, M.C.          No. 1 Company.
    Lieut. C. E. Irby, M.C.                       "    "
    Lieut. E. H. Tuckwell, M.C.                   "    "
    2nd Lieut. A. J. Gilbey                       "    "
    2nd Lieut. R. B. Osborne                  Replaced Lieut. Tuckwell
                                                on the 26th.
    Lieut. G. C. Burt                         Replaced 2nd Lieut. Gilbey
                                                on the 23rd.
    Capt. C. E. Benson, D.S.O.                No. 2 Company.
    Lieut. R. H. Rolfe.                           "    "
    Lieut. R. L. Murray-Lawes                     "    "
    Lieut, the Hon. C. C. S. Rodney           Replaced Lieut.
                                                Murray-Lawes on the 26th.
    Lieut. T. T. Pryce, M.C.                  Replaced Captain Benson on
                                                the 25th.
    Lieut. F. C. Lyon                         No. 3 Company.
    Lieut. M. D. Thomas                           "    "
    2nd Lieut. C. J. Dawson-Greene                "    "
    2nd Lieut. J. Macdonald                   (To Hospital on the 25th.)
    Capt. G. C. Sloane-Stanley                Replaced Lieut. Lyon on
                                                the 26th.
    Lieut. T. W. Minchin, D.S.O.              No. 4 Company.
    Lieut. N. R. Abbey                            "    "
    Lieut. J. E. Greenwood                        "    "
    2nd Lieut. R. D. Richardson                   "    "
    Capt. N. Grellier, M.C., R.A.M.C.         Medical Officer.

[Sidenote: Mar. 23.]

[Sidenote: Mar. 24.]

/#[5.3,60]
During the early morning (shells) were heard passing over at a great
height, and as the Battalion went through St. Pol it was clear that
the enemy had begun a systematic bombardment of the back areas, and
was paying particular attention to that town. Lieut.-Colonel Pilcher,
who had gone on ahead with Lord Ardee, sent back word for the buses to
proceed through Blairville to the cross-roads west of Boisleux-au-Mont.
There he summoned the Company Commanders, and explained the situation
to them. From where they were the men could see a large fire burning on
the sky-line, and this proved to be the canteen at Boisleux-au-Mont,
which was destroyed together with many thousand pounds' worth of food
in order to prevent these stores falling into the hands of the Germans.
Whether these drastic measures were necessary seems doubtful, since
the enemy did not reach this place till four days later. Guided by
Lieut.-Colonel Pilcher, the 4th Battalion moved through Hamelincourt
to a ravine east of the Ervillers-Boyelles road, where it arrived on
the morning of the 23rd. The line occupied by the 4th Guards Brigade
ran through Judas Farm, to the east of Ervillers; St. Leger was in the
hands of the Germans. The 4th Battalion and the 2nd Battalion Irish
Guards held the front line, while the 3rd Battalion Coldstream Guards
was in support. During the morning the news reached the Battalion that
the enemy had broken through at Mory, and that the right flank of the
Brigade was in danger; this was contradicted later. An order issued
to the Battalion to feel its right, and take over ground occupied by
the Fortieth Division was never carried out, as the troops on the
right refused to move, stating that they had received no orders. Then
commenced a most harassing shelling of our trenches by our own guns,
which every effort on the part of the Commanding Officer failed to
stop. Both British and German shells fell on our trenches and caused
many casualties, including Second Lieutenant Gilbey, who was wounded.
Nor was the shelling the only annoyance: the men in the front trench
were constantly employed in repelling attacks, and fired off no less
than 80,000 cartridges, inflicting continual losses on the advancing
enemy. The fighting went on intermittently all day, and, although the
enemy continually attacked the Brigade front, he was unable to make the
slightest impression on the line. That night Lord Ardee issued definite
orders for the whole Brigade to "side step" 1000 yards to the right, in
order to close any gaps that might exist near Mory. When the order was
carried out the next morning, the 2nd Battalion Irish Guards found no
troops on its right, and was in a precarious position. During the whole
day constant rumours of trouble on the right succeeded each other, and
in the evening the news arrived that the Fortieth Division had suffered
so severely that it had been relieved by the Forty-second Division.
Still the line remained intact, and the German attacks only resulted in
masses of their men being killed. The constant strain on our men was,
however, beginning to tell, and all ranks were glad when darkness came
down, and the attacks ceased. A curious order was issued warning the
men against spies dressed as British officers, who were spreading false
reports, with the object of hastening our retirement.
#/


[Sidenote: 4th Batt. Mar. 25, 1918]

[Sidenote: Mar. 26.]

During the morning of the 25th the Companies were warned of a possible
retirement under cover of darkness, and about noon it became certain
that the line had given way on the right, for men from various units
began coming back from the direction of Mory, followed by platoons
led by officers; and at 1 P.M. Captain Chapman, who went with the
Commanding Officers of the Coldstream and Irish Guards to reconnoitre,
reported Germans coming over the ridge on the right in large numbers.
This information was at once passed on to Lord Ardee, who gave
orders to evacuate the line and fall back north-west of Courcelles.
The situation when the order for retirement arrived was extremely
difficult, for not only had the right given way entirely, but the enemy
was advancing in some force directly against the Battalion Headquarters
of the Grenadiers and Coldstream, and there seemed nothing to prevent
their penetrating to the rear of the two Battalions. Lieut.-Colonel
Pilcher immediately withdrew Nos. 2 and 3 Companies under Captain
Benson and Lieutenant Lyon, and placed them on the high ground behind
Battalion Headquarters, whence they would be instantly available for
a counter-attack in case of emergency. All the time the shelling
continued, and the retirement had to be carried out with the enemy
unpleasantly close. While the order was being executed Captain Benson
was wounded, and was in danger of being left behind, but was gallantly
rescued and carried back by Sergeant Marsh. Indeed the evacuation of
all the wounded of the 4th Guards Brigade was a notably fine piece
of work. No wounded man was left to fall into the enemy's hands,
although the medical officers of the Coldstream and Irish Guards and
the sick-sergeant of the Grenadiers remained behind, after their
Battalions had retired, and the enemy was within a few hundred yards
of their aid-posts. Whether our artillery was imperfectly informed
as to the movements of the infantry in front, or whether they gave
the enemy credit for more rapidity than they possessed, is not clear,
but an unfortunate incident occurred which completely prevented a
counter-attack being made, when there was an opportunity of inflicting
a severe blow on the advancing enemy. A Company of Coldstream had been
formed up for a counter-attack, when, without any warning, our heavy
artillery poured shells on their Battalion Headquarters, where they
were assembling, causing a number of casualties. Although there was
constant shelling, the enemy seemed unwilling to come to close quarters
with the 4th Guards Brigade, and consequently when it became dark the
position remained unchanged, save for a strong defensive flank drawn
back on the right. That night the Companies were warned to assemble at
Battalion Headquarters, but when once more our heavy artillery began
to shell that particular spot, runners were despatched to alter the
point of assembly. Captain O'Brien, Irish Guards, was wounded by a
shell, and shortly afterwards Second Lieutenant Dawson-Greene was hit
by another at the assembly point, and died of the wounds he received
some days later. The Battalion formed up in the sunken road to the
rear of Battalion Headquarters, and marched off to the Crucifix at
Moyenneville, which it reached at 1 A.M. the next morning. Immediately
it arrived, it dug a new line of trenches east of the village, and the
men were supplied with hot food from the cookers which had been sent
up. All the time the German artillery continued to shell Moyenneville
without inflicting any casualties. At 4.30 A.M. the Battalion received
orders to retire to Ayette, and to hand over its positions to the
troops in front of it. Two hours later it moved back through Ayette to
Douchy-les-Ayette, where the Battalion Headquarters were established.
At noon an order arrived from Lord Ardee, assigning to the Battalion
the special rôle of occupying and fortifying Quesnoy Farm, and two
hours later it took up its new position. No. 3 Company, under Captain
G. C. Sloane-Stanley, on the left; No. 4, under Lieutenant Minchin,
in the centre; and No. 1, under Captain H. H. Sloane-Stanley, on the
right, dug in east of the farm, while No. 2, under Lieutenant T. Pryce,
remained in support behind the trench. The men were dead beat, having
worked and fought unceasingly for the last three days, and it was a
great relief to all ranks when the night passed quietly. An alarming
message of undoubted German origin was received, stating that the enemy
had broken through at Hebuterne with armoured motors, but this was
subsequently refuted.

[Sidenote: Mar. 27.]

[Sidenote: March 28-31.]

Early in the morning of the 27th it was reported that the 93rd Brigade
was retiring on the left, and this information was at once passed on
to the Brigade Headquarters; at first it was thought best to support
this Brigade, and an order to that effect was issued. This was,
however, cancelled later, and Lieut.-Colonel Pilcher was instructed to
send one Company to each of the other two Battalions of the Brigade.
Captain G. C. Sloane-Stanley and Lieutenant T. Pryce went off at once
with Nos. 1 and 2 Companies, and did not come under the orders of
the 4th Battalion again until the night of relief. In the meantime
the enemy determined to take advantage of the retirement of the 93rd
Brigade, and commenced to mass two battalions near the aerodrome
outside Ayette. This tempting target was not lost on our artillery,
but, in order that it might catch as large a number of the enemy as
possible, it waited until the movement was nearly completed. Then with
a deafening noise all available guns concentrated their fire on this
spot, with the result that the most of the force was annihilated,
and the survivors fled in disorder. It was as fine a bit of shooting
as any one could wish to see, and the results astonished even the
gunners themselves. Nos. 1 and 2 Companies, which had gone up to the
front line, were able, in spite of the cold and wet, to dig and wire a
formidable system of trenches. On the 28th Nos. 3 and 4 Companies moved
to the left, and occupied a line that had been dug by the 3rd Battalion
Coldstream Guards. The following three days passed quietly, and on the
night of the 31st the Battalion was relieved by the 16th Battalion of
the Lancashire Fusiliers, and marched back to Bienvillers. The total
casualties incurred during the ten days' operations were: 4 officers
wounded, and among the other ranks 9 killed, 1 died of wounds, 58
wounded, and 7 missing.




                             CHAPTER XXIX

                         APRIL, MAY, JUNE 1918

                          _Diary of the War_


[Sidenote: 1918]

The Germans, finding that their advance was being brought to a
standstill in the direction of Amiens, turned their attention farther
north, and determined to threaten the Channel ports. On April 9 they
began a concentrated attack with nine divisions on the British and
Portuguese front between Armentières and La Bassée, and the fighting
spread to Messines. Bailleul and Wulverghem, amongst other places,
fell, and the Germans reached the Forest of Nieppe. Here they were
checked, and at the end of April the German effort had spent itself,
although Marshal Foch had been obliged to expend much of his reserve.
The Germans had suffered enormous losses, and, though the German people
rejoiced at the gain of territory, those who knew the true state of
affairs were alarmed at the extravagant expenditure of men.

At the end of May Ludendorff determined to go straight for Paris, and
with twenty-five divisions overwhelmed the French between Soissons and
Rheims. This German onslaught continued with varying success until it
reached Château-Thierry. The stubborn resistance of the French made any
farther advance impossible, and, although the battle still raged on a
gigantic front, the Germans had to abandon their intention of striking
at Paris.

In April Naval raids on Zeebrugge and Ostend were made, and two ships
filled with concrete were successfully sunk at the entrance of the
Bruges Canal, while an obsolete submarine and two other ships were
blown up off the Mole at Ostend.

In Italy the Austrians began offensive operations on a large scale,
and crossed the Piave River, but the Italians, by a series of
counterattacks, regained the lost ground, and by the end of June had
driven back the Austrians with heavy loss across the river.


[Sidenote: 1st Batt.]

                           THE 1ST BATTALION

                           ROLL OF OFFICERS

    Lieut.-Colonel Viscount Gort, D.S.O.,
      M.V.O., M.C.                            Commanding Officer.
    Major C. H. Greville, D.S.O.              Second in Command.
    Capt. R. D. Lawford, M.C.                 Adjutant.
    Lieut. R. F. W. Echlin                    Transport Officer.
    2nd Lieut. E. G. Hawkesworth              Intelligence Officer.
    Capt. J. Teece, M.C.                      Quartermaster.
    Capt. P. Malcolm                          King's Company.
    Lieut. J. A. Lloyd                          "     "
    Lieut. L. G. Byng, M.C.                     "     "
    2nd Lieut. A. Ames                          "     "
    2nd Lieut. G. D. Neale                      "     "
    Capt. A. T. G. Rhodes                     No. 2 Company.
    Lieut. A. A. Moller, M.C.                   "     "
    Lieut. P. G. Simmons, M.C.                  "     "
    2nd Lieut. S. J. Hargreaves                 "     "
    2nd Lieut. O. W. D. Smith                   "     "
    Capt. O. F. Stein, D.S.O.                 No. 3 Company.
    Lieut. A. S. Chambers                       "     "
    2nd Lieut. W. A. Fleet                      "     "
    2nd Lieut. R. L. Webber                     "     "
    2nd Lieut. R. E. I. Holmes                  "     "
    Capt. R. Wolrige-Gordon, M.C.             No. 4 Company.
    Lieut. J. F. Tindal-Atkinson                "     "
    Lieut. the Hon. P. P. Cary                  "     "
    Lieut. H. B. Vernon                         "     "
    Lieut. R. C. Bruce                          "     "
    2nd Lieut. G. E. A. A. Fitz-G. Hamilton     "     "
    Lieut. W. B. Evans, U.S.M.O.R.C.          Medical Officer.

[Sidenote: April.]

After the very strenuous days at the end of March, when the German
attacks were successfully repelled, the 1st Battalion remained in the
front line for two days, but whether the enemy considered it wiser
to try some other parts of the line, or whether they were merely
waiting for reinforcements, they showed very little signs of life.
A heavy bombardment, directed against the Canadians on the left,
which was vigorously responded to, seemed to indicate an attack
in that direction, but by the time the 1st Battalion was relieved
no move on the part of the enemy had taken place. After two days'
rest at Blaireville the 1st Battalion returned to the trenches at
Boisleux-au-Mont, where the line was singularly quiet. Early on the
5th a desultory bombardment commenced on our front line, but only
with shells of light calibre. Later the railway station came under
fire from the heavy guns, but by 9 A.M. all was quiet again,
and no more shells were sent over by the enemy that day. Although
infinite trouble had been taken to conceal Battalion Headquarters, a
big flight of hostile aeroplanes flying low was able to locate it, and
the enemy made some very accurate shooting. On the 8th the enemy began
a gas bombardment, and obtained several direct hits on the entrance
to the Battalion Headquarters dug-out and on two Lewis-gun posts.
A new gas containing ether, which gave off little or no smell, was
used by the enemy, and accounted for a large number of the Battalion
Staff. After two more days' rest at Blaireville, the 1st Battalion
returned to the trenches, where, although the shelling was light, the
enemy's aircraft was very active, often flying low and firing into the
trenches. Patrols were sent out along the whole frontage on the night
of the 11th, and one under Second Lieutenant R. Holmes and Sergeant
Brown failed to return. Little, however, was seen of the enemy,
although a wiring party was encountered once, and another time the
Germans could be heard demolishing a hut near the main Arras--Bapaume
road. The next day the enemy occasionally fired with the Minenwerfer,
but there was no shelling to speak of. In the evening Lieutenant R.
Holmes and his patrol returned, having been cut off on the previous
night by very strong parties of the enemy. Finding they were unable
to regain our lines, they hid in shell-holes throughout the day, and
took advantage of the darkness when night came to get back. On the
14th, when the usual patrols went out, Second Lieutenant W. Fleet
took out a strong party to visit a German machine-gun post, which
had come under the observation of a patrol on the previous night.
Approaching it with caution, he found that it was unoccupied, but a
German rifle, which he brought back, seemed to show that the enemy
had been there lately. Four escaped British prisoners, who had been
captured on the 21st, re-entered our lines near the sunken road; they
belonged to the Sixth Division. The 1st Battalion went for ten days'
rest to Barly until the 24th, when they marched to Bienvillers-au-Bois
on their way to the trenches. Lieutenant Tindal-Atkinson and Second
Lieutenant Paget-Cooke, who had just arrived to join the Battalion,
were wounded by a shell that fell in No. 4 Company Mess. On the night
of the 27th the 1st Battalion returned to the front line of trenches,
but the Germans were singularly inactive except for occasional bursts
of shell-fire. The patrols that were sent out failed to encounter
any German parties, but one discovered that Calcutta Trench had been
recently occupied by the enemy. Signs of its recent occupation were
found in the shape of fresh bombs, rifles, etc., and a corporal's
greatcoat proved that the occupants had belonged to the 453rd Regiment.
Traces of German occupation could be seen all over the ground, but the
most recent was the line of newly dug posts about 80 yards west of the
Ablainzeville--Ayette road. The enemy evidently occupied an advanced
picket line, as individual heads could be seen on the low ground, and
the rapidity with which his light machine-guns and snipers opened fire
from various points confirmed this surmise. On the 29th the enemy
still remained inactive, and never engaged any targets which offered
themselves. In the evening snipers were sent out from our lines to
positions, where they could observe and engage any movement on the
part of the enemy, who could be seen advancing in groups of two to
occupy shell-slits. Parties were dribbled forward by the King's and
No. 2 Companies, and told to occupy any empty enemy-slits, to check
any advance of the enemy. These moves and countermoves continued up to
9 P.M., when Lord Gort decided to withdraw all the advanced
posts, and patrols continued to reconnoitre throughout the night.

[Sidenote: May.]

The enemy's attitude during May was purely defensive, and except
for two half-hearted raids he showed no inclination to come west of
the line of the Ablainzeville--Ayette road. The Germans apparently
were occupying an outpost line from Ablainzeville to Ayette, with a
shell-hole line in rear and a line of resistance again behind that,
and the situation depended very much on what was going on in other
parts of the line: if the enemy succeeded in driving back the troops to
the north and south, a retirement would become necessary, even without
any movement of the hostile troops in front.

During the whole month the 1st Battalion remained either in the front
trenches or in reserve. When in the trenches one and a half Companies
held the front line, and one and a half Companies were in support,
with one Company in reserve. On the days they became the Reserve
Battalion, they were simply targets for the German artillery; every
day there were casualties, and the number of men killed, wounded,
and gassed amounted to a good many during the month. On some days
the enemy activity was very slight, and on others the shelling would
become intense. Patrols under officers were sent out every night, and
the information gained varied. Occasionally bodies of Germans would
be reported, moving about and talking, but when no attack developed
such movements ceased to have any significance. The back areas were
shelled with gas-shells daily, and so it happened that the casualties,
when the Battalion was in reserve, were often greater than when it was
in the front line. On the 17th the area occupied by the 1st Battalion
was subjected to a severe bombing by aircraft; Second Lieutenant W.
A. Fleet and Second Lieutenant G. E. A. A. Fitz-George Hamilton were
killed, and Second Lieutenant S. J. Hargreaves and Second Lieutenant G.
D. Neale were seriously wounded. The two latter never recovered from
the wounds they received, and died the next day. The loss of these four
keen young officers was deeply felt by the whole Battalion. At the
same time Sergeant Robshaw and Lance-Sergeant Nicholson, the Lewis-gun
instructors, were wounded and buried by the walls of a house, which
were blown in by a bomb on the top of them. On the 20th the Cojeul
Valley was bombarded with gas-shells, and Captain O. Stein, Second
Lieutenant R. Holmes, and Second Lieutenant C. Brutton were gassed. A
few days of rain and mist were welcomed by every one, since it made
observation impossible, and therefore the enemy's artillery had to
content itself with a small amount of inaccurate shelling. On the 24th
Second Lieutenant O. W. D. Smith was seriously wounded by a shell. On
the 28th a German propaganda balloon was shot down near Quesnoy Farm;
it contained copies of the _Gazette des Ardennes_, a French newspaper,
edited by the Germans. Although enemy transport activity could be often
distinctly heard, the impending offensive never developed.

[Sidenote: June.]

Much the same programme was followed at the beginning of June, and
without any definite movement the enemy continued to bombard both the
front trenches and the back area. On the 5th the Germans were located
by a patrol, working on the road, and Stokes mortars were turned on to
them, with the result that Véry lights went up in quick succession, no
doubt an appeal for assistance. The guns on both sides were continually
busy both day and night, and a great many shells of various sorts must
have been fired. On the 8th the Battalion retired for a rest to Barly,
where it remained until the end of the month.


[Sidenote: 2nd Batt.]

                           THE 2ND BATTALION

                           ROLL OF OFFICERS

    Lieut.-Colonel G. E. C. Rasch, D.S.O.        Commanding Officer.
    Major the Hon. W. R. Bailey, D.S.O.          Second in Command.
    Capt. A. H. Penn                             Adjutant.
    Lieut. R. G. Briscoe, M.C.                   Assistant Adjutant.
    Hon. Capt. W. E. Acraman, M.C., D.C.M.       Quartermaster.
    Lieut. G. G. M. Vereker, M.C.                Transport Officer.
    Capt. F. A. M. Browning, D.S.O.              No. 1 Company.
    Lieut. A. W. Acland, M.C.                     "       "
    Lieut. the Hon. H. F. P. Lubbock              "       "
    2nd Lieut. J. S. Carter                       "       "
    2nd Lieut. G. F. Lawrence                     "       "
    2nd Lieut. R. C. M. Bevan                     "       "
    Capt. O. Martin Smith                        No. 2 Company.
    Lieut. R. H. R. Palmer                        "       "
    Lieut. W. H. S. Dent                          "       "
    2nd Lieut. C. A. Fitch                        "       "
    Lieut. A. C. Knollys                          "       "
    Lieut. S. T. S. Clarke, M.C.                 No. 3 Company.
    2nd Lieut. H. White                           "       "
    2nd Lieut. the Hon. S. A. S. Montagu          "       "
    2nd Lieut. R. T. Sharpe                       "       "
    Capt. G. C. Fitz-H. Harcourt-Vernon, D.S.O.  No. 4 Company.
    Lieut. R. A. W. Bicknell, M.C.                "       "
    Lieut. F. H. J. Drummond, M.C.                "       "
    Lieut. F. P. Loftus                           "       "
    2nd Lieut. P. V. Pelly                        "       "
    2nd Lieut. J. A. Paton                        "       "
    Capt. the Rev. and Hon. C. F. Lyttelton      Chaplain.
    Lieut. L. J. Early                           Medical Officer.

[Sidenote: April.]

On the night of April 3 the Thirty-second Division captured Ayette,
which considerably eased the situation on the right flank of the
Guards Division. The 2nd Battalion went up into the line, and found
the trenches very wet. On the 4th, during a heavy shelling, which was
entirely directed against No. 1 Company on the right, Lieutenant the
Hon. H. F. P. Lubbock was killed by a shell which pitched in the trench.

This was a great loss to the Battalion, for he was an officer of sound
judgment, who did not know what fear was. Corporal Teague, M.M., was
killed at the same time, and 6 men were wounded. The 7th and 8th were
spent in a camp behind Blaireville and Heudecourt, when Lieutenant F.
H. J. Drummond and Second Lieutenant G. F. Lawrence joined. After two
more days in the trenches the 2nd Battalion retired to Saulty, where
they remained training till the 24th. On the 14th Second Lieutenant
J. A. Paton and Second Lieutenant C. A. Fitch arrived from the
Reinforcement Battalion, and on the 20th Second Lieutenant C. Gwyer
joined.

On the 24th the 2nd Battalion proceeded in buses to
Bienvillers-au-Bois, to relieve the 15th Battalion Highland Light
Infantry, in reserve west of Douchy-les-Ayette. Two companies were
billeted in the old German line just west of Monchy-au-Bois, and the
remainder were in trenches between Douchy-les-Ayette and Monchy. The
following day the Battalion moved up into the front line on the eastern
outskirts of Ayette, and found everything very quiet. The explanation
seemed to be that the Germans were thinning out their troops in this
district, in order to increase their forces available for the thrust
forward north on the night of the 29th. Second Lieutenant C. A. Fitch,
who had gone out with a patrol to reconnoitre the German lines, was
wounded in the head and right arm by a bomb thrown from a German post.

[Sidenote: May.]

The same routine was carried out all during May: five days in the front
line with inter-company relief, followed by two days in reserve at
Monchy-au-Bois. On the 4th an American Company Commander and three
N.C.O.'s were attached to the 2nd Battalion under instruction. In
order to ensure that the junior officers were proficient in technical
subjects, special lectures were given by Officers from different
branches of the service, and were attended by Officers and N.C.O.'s
of the Battalion when it was in reserve. On the 11th Lieutenant J.
C. Cornforth arrived, and on the 19th Lieutenant C. A. Gordon and
Lieutenant H. A. Finch joined the Battalion. On the 22nd, during a
heavy bombardment which was directed on the front line, Lieutenant
A. W. Acland, M.C., was wounded, and almost every day there were
casualties amongst other ranks. The exact spot the enemy would select
for their next thrust was naturally not known, and a determined attack
was expected daily, but except for intense shelling the enemy showed
no signs of life. On the 27th the shelling increased, and the enemy
aircraft became very active, with the result that there were 9 men
killed and 8 wounded.

[Sidenote: June.]

The first week in June was spent by the 2nd Battalion in the front
line, where the shells continued to fall with monotonous regularity.
On the 3rd Lieutenant R. M. Oliver joined the Battalion. On the 6th,
after a relief, rendered difficult by the enemy's barrage, which had
been put down on the tracks leading to the trenches, the 2nd Battalion
proceeded to Saulty, where they were billeted in the village and
the Château grounds. There they remained till the end of the month,
training, carrying out tactical schemes, and learning the latest
developments in bombing. Colonel Rasch organised a platoon competition
in the following: bomb-throwing, rifle-bombing, message-carrying by
platoon runners, stretcher-bearer competitions, bayonet-fighting,
Lewis-gunnery, musketry, tactical scheme and drill. The tactical scheme
was judged by the two other Commanding Officers in the Brigade, and the
drill by the three Regimental Sergeant-Majors. No. 7 Platoon, under
Lieutenant Palmer, was the winner; No. 16 Platoon, under Sergeant
Taylor, second; and No. 4 Platoon, under Second Lieutenant Bevan,
third. At the Divisional Horse Show, which took place on the 22nd,
the 2nd Battalion won Major-General Feilding's Cup, and Lieutenant G.
Vereker, the Transport Officer, was congratulated on his horses having
proved themselves the best in the Division. On the 23rd Lieutenant N.
McK. Jesper, Lieutenant L. St. L. Hermon-Hodge, and Second Lieutenant
F. J. Langley rejoined the Battalion, and in the absence of Colonel
Rasch, who had gone temporarily to command the Brigade, Captain
Harcourt-Vernon took over the command of the Battalion. On the 29th a
Guard of Honour for H.R.H. the Duke of Connaught, under the command
of Captain Browning, went in buses to the Third Army Headquarters
at Hesdin, where their smart appearance created a great impression.
Onlookers refused to believe that the men had just come out of the
line, and maintained that they had been sent out from England for
the purpose. The following day, the Army Commander, General Sir
Julian Byng, in a message addressed to the Division, expressed the
satisfaction at their smart appearance, and added that their turn-out
and bearing, their marching and handling of arms, were beyond all
criticism.


[Sidenote: 3rd Batt.]

                           THE 3RD BATTALION

                           ROLL OF OFFICERS

    Lieut.-Colonel A. F. A. N. Thorne, D.S.O.      Commanding Officer.
    Major R. H. V. Cavendish, M.V.O.               Second in Command.
    Capt. the Hon. A. G. Agar-Robartes, M.C.       Adjutant.
    Lieut. E. G. A. Fitzgerald, D.S.O.             Assistant Adjutant.
    Lieut. F. J. Heasman                           Transport Officer.
    Capt. G. H. Wall                               Quartermaster.
    Capt. A. F. R. Wiggins                         No. 1 Company.
    Lieut. A. G. Elliott                            "       "
    2nd Lieut. C. L. F. Boughey                     "       "
    Capt. G. A. I. Dury, M.C.                      No. 2 Company.
    Lieut. A. H. S. Adair                           "       "
    2nd Lieut. W. A. Pembroke                       "       "
    Lieut. E. N. de Geijer                         No. 3 Company.
    Lieut. G. W. Godman                             "       "
    2nd Lieut. W. B. Ball                           "       "
    Capt. C. H. Bedford                            No. 4 Company.
    Lieut. H. St. J. Williams                       "       "
    2nd Lieut. E. J. Bunbury                        "       "
    Capt. Ffoulkes, R.A.M.C.                       Medical Officer.
    Capt. the Rev. S. Phillimore, M.C.             Chaplain.

[Sidenote: April.]

The 3rd Battalion spent the whole month of April either in the
trenches, with three Companies in the front line, or in reserve. On
the 7th Lieutenant E. G. A. Fitzgerald was wounded, and on the 8th
the following officers joined the Battalion: Lieutenant F. A. Magnay,
Second Lieutenant R. K. Henderson, Lieutenant C. Clifton Brown, and
Second Lieutenant H. W. Sanderson. The days spent in the front
trenches were remarkably quiet, but as the ground on which these
trenches were dug was overlooked by the enemy, very little work could
be done except wiring, and this at night. On the 14th the Battalion,
having "embussed" at Ransart, proceeded _via_ Beaumetz-les-Loges to
Lakerlière and Larbret, where it was billeted. On the 17th drafts
reached the Battalion with the following officers: Second Lieutenant E.
L. F. Clough-Taylor, Second Lieutenant R. Delacombe, Second Lieutenant
W. B. L. Manley, Second Lieutenant H. J. Gibbon, and Second Lieutenant
R. C. G. de Reuter. The days spent in billets were taken up with
training, but as the men had to remain ready to move at one hour's
notice in the morning and three hours' notice in the afternoon, it
was impossible for Companies to go far. An attack from the enemy was
expected on the 21st, and additional precautions were taken, but the
Battalion was not called upon to go up into the front line. Major Lord
Lascelles was appointed Second in Command _vice_ Major Cavendish, and
as Lieut.-Colonel Thorne had to take temporary command of the Brigade,
he had at once to command the Battalion. Companies were now organised
into three platoons with the headquarters of a fourth or depot platoon,
to which all details were attached, when the Battalion went into
action. On the 24th Lieut.-Colonel Thorne returned to the Battalion,
and took it up into the front line the following day. On the 27th the
front posts were subjected to an unusually heavy shelling, during
which Second Lieutenant C. L. F. Boughey was wounded, and there were
6 killed and 5 wounded among other ranks. On the following day the
Battalion retired into Brigade Reserve, where it remained till the end
of the month.

[Sidenote: May.]

During the first week in May the Battalion remained in the line,
with an inter-company relief, Major Lord Lascelles taking turns with
Lieut.-Colonel Thorne. On the 3rd Second Lieutenant R. P. Papillon
and Lieutenant the Hon. M. H. E. C. Towneley-Bertie joined. Officers'
patrols were sent out every night and in the early morning, to lie
out and listen for any hostile movement. After three days' rest the
Battalion returned to the trenches, and came in for much shelling.
Our artillery carried out nightly a harassing fire on the enemy's
tracks, roads, and possible assembly areas, and this naturally brought
down considerable retaliation. Lieutenant the Hon. M. H. E. C.
Towneley-Bertie was wounded, and among other ranks there were 10 killed
and 14 wounded. Another tour of duty in the front line from the 20th to
the 24th caused 2 killed and 25 wounded among other ranks. On the 26th
Captain G. F. R. Hirst, Lieutenant E. R. M. Fryer, M.C., and Second
Lieutenant J. Chapman joined the Battalion. On the 28th the Battalion
returned to the front trenches, and again came in for a harassing fire.
Inter-company reliefs were carried out, and the work was concentrated
on shelters and the deepening of lateral communication trenches.

[Sidenote: June.]

The Battalion remained in the front line until June 3, and was
constantly bombarded with Blue Cross gas-shells. On the 2nd Lieutenant
G. M. Cornish, M.C., joined. After four days spent in reserve the
Battalion retired to La Baseque, where the men were either billeted
in the farms, or placed in tents and shelters in the wood. There they
remained until the end of the month, training and practising tactical
schemes.




                              CHAPTER XXX

                           APRIL 1-14, 1918

                           THE 4TH BATTALION


[Sidenote: 4th Batt. April 1-14, 1918.]

In April 1918 it fell to the lot of the 4th Guards Brigade to take part
in some of the fiercest fighting of the war.

Ludendorff had opened a concentrated attack with nine divisions on
the line north of La Bassée, and General von Quast, who commanded the
German forces, had penetrated the portion of the line held by the
Portuguese, and gained a considerable amount of ground. Reinforced by
General von Arnim's infantry, he pushed on in the hope of gaining the
Channel ports, or, at the least, of cutting the British communications.
The German masses were pressing forward, and the general situation
became more and more critical.

The attack commenced on April 9, and the Fifteenth Corps, under
Lieut.-General Sir J. P. du Cane, which had been driven back, was
holding the line between Merville and Vieux Berquin, south-east of
Hazebrouck. Although the troops in Merville held fast, the enemy broke
through at Robermetz, and, after capturing Neuf Berquin, moved down the
road to Vierhoek.

Such was the state of affairs, when the 4th Guards Brigade was sent
for to restore the line. After having "debussed" at Strazeele, it
marched towards Vieux Berquin on the evening of April 11. Next day
Brigadier-General the Hon. L. J. P. Butler received orders to attack
Vierhoek, Pont Rondin, and Les Puresbecques, but before he could make
much headway, was himself in turn vigorously engaged by the enemy.
Reinforcements were being hurried up from several quarters, but
everything depended on whether the line would hold. If the Australian
Division, which was being sent up from the rear, could have time to
detrain and take up good positions, the German rush would be checked.
But should the enemy break through far enough to dislocate this
arrangement, matters would become serious.

Realising the gravity of the crisis, General de Lisle, commanding
the Fifteenth Corps, issued an order that no retirement must be made
without an order in writing, signed by a responsible officer, who must
be prepared to justify his action before a court-martial. Every inch
of ground was to be disputed, and every company was told to stand firm
until reinforcements could arrive.

       *       *       *       *       *

The roll of officers of the 4th Battalion at the beginning of April was
as follows:

    Lieut.-Colonel W. S. Pilcher, D.S.O.     Commanding Battalion.
    Major C. F. A. Walker, M.C.              Second in Command.
    Capt. C. R. Gerard, D.S.O.               Adjutant.
    Capt. M. Chapman, M.C.                   Intelligence Officer.
    Capt. I. H. Ingleby                      Act.-Quartermaster.
    Lieut. G. W. Selby-Lowndes               Transport Officer.
    Capt. H. H. Sloane-Stanley, M.C.         No. 1 Company.
    Lieut. C. E. Irby, M.C.                   "       "
    Lieut. E. H. Tuckwell, M.C.               "       "
    Lieut. G. C. Burt                         "       "
    2nd Lieut. R. B. Osborne                  "       "
    Lieut. T. T. Pryce, M.C.                 No. 2 Company.
    Lieut. the Hon. C. C. S. Rodney           "       "
    Lieut. R. H. Rolfe                        "       "
    Lieut. R. L. Murray-Lawes                 "       "
    Capt. G. C. Sloane-Stanley               No. 3 Company.
    Lieut. F. C. Lyon                         "       "
    Lieut. the Hon. A. H. L. Hardinge, M.C.   "       "
    Lieut. M. D. Thomas                       "       "
    Lieut. T. W. Minchin, D.S.O.             No. 4 Company.
    Lieut. N. R. Abbey                        "       "
    Lieut. G. R. Green                        "       "
    Lieut. J. E. Greenwood                    "       "
    2nd Lieut. R. D. Richardson               "       "
    Capt. N. Grellier, M.C., R.A.M.C.        Medical Officer.

The Battalion was in billets at Villers Brulin on April 10, when
Lieut.-Colonel Pilcher received orders to move up in omnibuses to
Strazeele Station _via_ St. Pol. According to instructions it should
have started "embussing" at 11.30 that night, but owing to some mistake
the buses were twelve hours late, and all ranks spent the night and
half the next day waiting by the roadside. It was impossible to cook
any proper breakfasts, and too cold to sleep, so that when at last
a start was made the men were already tired out. Then for twelve
hours they jolted along in the buses, terribly cramped and without
any opportunity for real rest. When it arrived at its destination
next day, the Battalion marched to a field near Le Paradis, where
Brigadier-General Butler held a conference. There were to be two
battalions in the front line and one in reserve; on the right was
the 3rd Battalion Coldstream which was to take up a position from
L'Epinette to Le Cornet Perdu. The 4th Battalion Grenadiers would be on
the left, and the 2nd Battalion Irish Guards in reserve.

[Sidenote: April 12.]

Marching off at once, the whole force reached its position about dawn
on the 12th. So promptly was the movement carried out that there was no
time to issue rations, and the food had to follow on later in limbers.
There was also a considerable shortage of tools, with the result that
when daylight came the men were still very inadequately dug-in. In the
4th Battalion, No. 1 Company, under Captain H. Sloane-Stanley, was on
the right, No. 4, under Lieutenant Green, in the centre, and No. 2,
under Captain Pryce, on the left, with No. 3, under Lieutenant Nash,
in support. As soon as it was light the enemy opened a heavy fire
along the whole front with field-guns, while they swept with their
lighter field-guns and machine-guns all places where they detected
any movement. Battalion Headquarters seemed to come in for special
attention, and, whenever any one went in or out, it was the signal for
a shower of shells to fall round the spot.

An order came to Brigadier-General Butler to secure the line from the
College to Vieux Moulin with his brigade, and to prevent any movements
along the Merville--Neuf Berquin road. He accordingly went up to
Battalion Headquarters, and ordered an advance at 11 A.M.
At the same time he sent up two companies of the Irish Guards to
advance in échelon behind the right flank, in the hope of getting
in touch with the Fiftieth Division. In the 4th Battalion Captain H.
Sloane-Stanley was told to push forward two platoons to seize Vierhoek,
and Captain Pryce to occupy Pont Rondin with a similar force.

       *       *       *       *       *

The following were the officers who took part in the operations from
April 12 to 14:

    Lieut.-Colonel W. S. Pilcher, D.S.O.   Commanding Battalion.
    Capt. C. R. Gerard, D.S.O.             Adjutant.
    Capt. M. Chapman, M.C.                 Intelligence Officer.
    Lieut. N. R. Abbey                     Attached B.H.Q.
    Capt. H. H. Sloane-Stanley, M.C.       No. 1 Company.
    2nd Lieut. H. Stratford                 "       "
    2nd Lieut. R. B. Osborne                "       "
    Capt. T. T. Pryce, M.C.                No. 2 Company.
    Lieut. the Hon. C. C. S. Rodney         "       "
    2nd Lieut. G. P. Philipps               "       "
    Lieut. C. S. Nash, M.C.                No. 3 Company.
    Lieut. M. D. Thomas                     "       "
    2nd Lieut. P. H. Cox                    "       "
    Lieut. G. R. Green                     No. 4 Company.
    2nd Lieut. J. E. Greenwood              "       "
    2nd Lieut. G. W. Sich                   "       "
    Capt. N. Grellier, M.C., R.A.M.C.      Medical Officer.

The attack started at 11 A.M., but the Coldstream encountered
such strenuous opposition that they were unable to advance more than
100 yards. Nor could No. 1 Company of the 4th Battalion Grenadiers
make much headway towards Vierhoek, owing to the intense and accurate
machine-gun and artillery fire, which swept the only road over the
stream; and it suffered severely in its attempts to carry out the
orders. Second Lieutenant Osborne, however, had managed to push on
about 200 yards with his platoon when he was wounded. But No. 2 Company
made a most skilful advance towards Pont Rondin, led by Captain Pryce
himself.

In the houses down the road, by which the Grenadiers had to come,
the Germans were posted with light machine-guns, and before any
progress could be made these houses had to be cleared. Slowly and
systematically, No. 2 Company worked from house to house, and silenced
the machine-guns. Thirty Germans were killed in this way--Captain Pryce
alone accounted for seven--and were found afterwards in the houses or
near by. Two machine-guns were taken, as well as a couple of prisoners.

During the whole operation, this company was under heavy fire, not only
from machine-guns but also from a battery of field-guns, which was
firing with open sights from a position some 300 yards down the road.
It was a remarkably fine performance, and was watched with intense
interest from Battalion Headquarters, which were some 200 yards in rear
of the centre of the line, in a position from which the commanding
officer could see most of the trenches occupied by his battalion.
Lieutenant Nash, who had brought up one platoon to support No. 2
Company, was on his way back when his hand was carried away by a shell,
and the command of No. 3 Company devolved on Lieutenant M. D. Thomas.

About 3 P.M. the situation of the 4th Guards Brigade became
very critical. On the right the Coldstream reported that there was no
sign of the Fiftieth Division, which should have been on their right
flank, and at the same time Captain Pryce sent back word that his left
flank was in the air, and that Germans could be seen 1000 yards in rear
of his company. He added that he was being engaged by trench mortars
and field-guns, which were firing at him with open sights from the
exposed flank.

Affairs on the right were improved by the arrival of a company of the
Irish Guards, which, without orders, undertook a counter-attack in
conjunction with a company of the Coldstream. But, having no troops to
send up on the left flank, Brigadier-General Butler decided that that
portion of the line must be withdrawn. Accordingly, Lieut.-Colonel
Pilcher ordered Captain Pryce to fall back, but even then there was
a large gap between his company and the troops on the left flank,
of which the Germans took advantage. Having reached the position
indicated, Captain Pryce held on to it in spite of several determined
attacks by the enemy. Colonel Pilcher, accompanied by the Adjutant,
Captain Gerard, visited the left of the line about 4.30 P.M.
He found No. 2 Company rather scattered, as it had been compelled
to form a defensive flank. Meanwhile, after an intense artillery
preparation, the enemy attacked No. 1 and No. 4 Companies, and was
driven back with severe losses.

All day the Battalion Headquarters were severely shelled by two German
field-guns and also by trench mortars. The farm they occupied was set
on fire, and both Captain M. Chapman, who had distinguished himself on
many occasions as intelligence officer, and Lieutenant N. R. Abbey,
who was attached to Battalion Headquarters, were killed by shells.
A good many valuable men, who had served on Battalion Headquarters
for a long time, were killed or wounded during the day. The farm was
full of cows and horses, which had to be turned loose when the farm
caught fire, and several casualties took place on this account. The
Headquarters were afterwards moved to the garden of the farm. To some
extent the fire was kept down by the skilful and gallant conduct of
Lieutenant Lewis of the 152nd Brigade R.F.A., who exposed himself
continually to get direct observation, while his guns undoubtedly
inflicted heavy casualties on the advancing Germans.

At the close of the day, the front of the 4th Battalion remained
intact, but the cost of holding this line against repeated assaults had
necessarily been very heavy. No. 2 Company lost 80 men and 1 officer
out of 120 who went into action, and No. 4 Company lost 70 per cent
of its strength and all the officers. The total casualties in the
Battalion were 250, including 8 officers. On the other hand, the enemy
lost so heavily that the ground in front of the Battalion was strewn
with their dead; in some places there were heaps of bodies piled up in
front of the trenches. Some idea of the fierceness of the fighting may
be gathered from the fact that during the day the 4th Battalion alone
fired off no less than 70,000 rounds of ammunition.

In view of the situation on both flanks, Brigadier-General Butler gave
orders on the night of the 12th that the Brigade was to take up a new
line. For this the 2nd Battalion Irish Guards was to have its right
resting on Pont Tournant, with the 3rd Battalion Coldstream in the
centre, and the 4th Battalion Grenadiers on the left, in touch with the
12th Battalion K.O.Y.L.I., which was to join up with the troops of the
Twenty-ninth Division. In response to General Butler's request that the
line held by his brigade might be contracted, the Fifth Division was
ordered to take over the line as far as L'Epinette inclusive.

As soon as this relief was completed, the 2nd Battalion Irish Guards
and one company of the Coldstream were withdrawn into Brigade Reserve,
and the 210th Field Company R.E. went up, to help the 4th Battalion
Grenadiers dig the new line. To replace some of the losses in the
Battalion, Captain Minchin, Lieutenant Lyon, and Lieutenant Burt were
sent up, and Lieutenant Murray-Lawes went to Battalion Headquarters.
Colonel Pilcher's orders were to delay the enemy at all costs, so as to
give the Australian Division time to detrain and come up to that part
of the line.

The new Battalion frontage was 1800 yards long; the country was
absolutely flat, with not a single hedge to mask the trenches, and
the line was held by companies in isolated posts. So heavily had the
Battalion suffered in the fighting on the 12th that it had only 9
officers and 180 other ranks left--that is to say, one man to every ten
yards of front.

As the Battalion Headquarters had been destroyed, Colonel Pilcher
assembled the newly-arrived officers at the Irish Guards Headquarters,
and explained to them that the new line was to be dug east of the Vieux
Berquin--Neuf Berquin road, so that the village of La Couronne and
the cross-roads south of it might be protected. When Captain Minchin
reached the leading companies, Captain Pryce told him the men were so
dead beat that he thought they were quite incapable of digging a new
line, and the Adjutant of the K.O.Y.L.I. said his men were in much the
same condition. When this was reported to Colonel Pilcher, he went up
himself to explain how things stood. He could find no trace of the
machine-guns from the Thirty-first Division, which should have been
there. The Germans were so close that they could be heard talking quite
distinctly. He found Captain Pryce, who was quite worn out from want
of sleep, and made it clear that the orders must be carried out, as it
was absolutely essential to alter the position of the trenches. The
plans had been changed, and the line the Battalion was now to occupy
lay between La Couronne and the burnt farm, that had been the Battalion
Headquarters.

The men were awakened with difficulty, and led to the new position,
where, exhausted as they were, they were set to dig themselves in.
Having satisfied himself that the orders were understood, Colonel
Pilcher went in search of Captain Minchin, but failed to find him in
the dark. The field company of R.E., that was to have been sent up
to help, did not appear, and as there were only 14 men left in No. 4
Company, and 30 in No. 2, a continuous line of trenches was out of the
question. Captain Minchin, therefore, ordered them to dig rifle-pits,
capable of holding three or four men at intervals, and even so there
were gaps of considerable length between companies. So utterly weary
were the men that it was not at all easy to make them understand what
had to be done, and naturally the darkness did not help to simplify
matters. No. 1 Company, under Captain H. Sloane-Stanley, had gone too
far to the right, and instead of being up to the burnt farm was some
200 yards away. This made it necessary to post a strong sentry group,
where it could guard the gap.

It was nearly dawn before the digging was finished; one man in each bay
then took turns to watch while the other three slept. One source of
constant anxiety to the officers was the ammunition, which had not been
sent up. Just before dawn Lieutenant Lyon received a message that it
had been dumped near La Couronne, but as it was then getting light he
could not send men for it. Captain Pryce, however, succeeded in getting
five boxes before daylight.

[Sidenote: April 13.]

Fog hung thickly round during the early morning of the 13th, and
it was found that the Germans had taken advantage of it to work up
machine-guns close to our line. Their first attack occurred at 6.30,
and was directed against the 3rd Battalion Coldstream. With the aid of
a tank, the enemy forced his way between the left and centre companies
of the Coldstream, but was soon ejected. A company of the 2nd Battalion
Irish Guards went up later to strengthen that part of the line. At
9.15 Colonel Pilcher found that strong German attacks were developing
all down the line, and sent orders round to the companies that they
must hold on to their line at all costs, and fight to the end. This
message was duly acknowledged by all officers commanding companies.

  [Illustration: _4th Battalion at La Couronne_

  _Position on April 13, 1918._
  ]

As soon as the mist cleared away, the Germans opened fire with their
machine-guns and swept the parapet with bullets. When the light
improved, they brought up more machine-guns, and were able to enfilade
the trenches. Under cover of this fire they crawled forward by ones and
twos, and established sniping posts in some unfinished trenches not
150 yards off. The Brigade-Major came up to Battalion Headquarters,
to confirm the report that the troops on the left had retired, and
that the left was entirely in the air. He had also heard that the
enemy had penetrated the centre of the Brigade. Colonel Pilcher and
the Brigade-Major went down the road to within some 150 yards of La
Couronne, where they met Private Bagshaw (afterwards killed), who
was runner to No. 4 Company, and who reported that the centre was
still intact. After going up close to the front line to verify this
statement, the Brigade-Major returned to inform the Brigadier of what
he had ascertained.

Captain Minchin meanwhile reported the precarious condition of affairs
in front, and was told in reply that a company of Irish Guards and
a platoon of Coldstream would be sent to his assistance, but these
reinforcements never arrived. At one time the Germans seemed to be
contemplating a determined attack; they stood up and advanced in
extended order, in the hope of finding a gap and penetrating the line,
but the steady fire poured on them by the 4th Battalion soon changed
their minds, and sent them back to cover. About 12.30 P.M. the
12th Pioneer Battalion of the K.O.Y.L.I. at La Couronne was completely
blown out of its trenches by the enemy's trench mortars. When the men
of that battalion found that the troops on their left had been pushed
back, and that the Germans were working round in rear of them, they
had no choice but to retire. This placed the left flank of the 4th
Battalion in the air.

Captain Pryce sent back an urgent message saying that the Germans were
in Vieux Berquin and La Couronne, and that another column, estimated at
two battalions, was advancing from Bleu. Up to that point, he added,
he had managed to beat off the enemy, and there was a large number
of their dead in front of his trenches, but he was not strong enough
to resist much longer the repeated assaults of so large a force. As
soon as this message reached General Butler, he sent up the company
of Irish Guards, which had already been promised, but it never got to
Captain Pryce, for by now the Germans had wedged themselves in some
force between him and his hopes of relief. Advancing north of the
road leading to La Couronne, the reinforcing company was met by large
numbers of Germans coming from La Becque. It fought on till it was
completely cut off, and only one sergeant and six men escaped.

An attempt was made to alter the position of a Lewis-gun belonging to
No. 2 Company, but the moment they moved the N.C.O. and the men with it
were fired on, and the gun was disabled. Finding that all attempts to
retrieve the gun were useless, Second Lieutenant Philipps, who was in
charge of the party, decided to rejoin Captain Pryce, but was hit in
the hip by a machine-gun bullet just as he reached the trench.

Their turning of the left flank allowed the Germans to creep round
in rear of the Battalion, but they had not gone far before they were
engaged by the Battalion Headquarters, as well as the 3rd Battalion
Coldstream Headquarters, who offered a most determined resistance.
This final effort kept them successfully at bay until the arrival of
the Australian Division put a final and effective stop to any farther
movements on their part.

There remains the epic story of Captain Pryce. One last message was
received from him--that his company was surrounded and his men shooting
to front and to rear, standing back to back in the trenches to meet the
encircling enemy at all points.

Of what happened afterwards, an outline at any rate was gathered from a
corporal of the company, who escaped from Vieux Berquin the following
night. Reduced now to only thirty men, the gallant little band fought
on all that day. Without a pause they fired at their advancing foes,
steadily, calmly, with the same rapidity and deadly aim that caused the
Germans in the Mons retreat to mistake our "contemptible" riflemen
for machine-guns. The enemy was puzzled. They could not for a moment
believe that such a stout resistance could be put up by anything but
a formidable force, and dared not make the attempt to come to close
quarters.

By the evening the defenders were practically at the end of their
tether. Only eighteen out of the thirty were left, and they had used
up every scrap of ammunition. The Germans were in Verte Rue, and the
beleaguered band could see the field-grey uniforms advancing towards
Bois d'Aval. It was now 8.15. Suddenly Captain Pryce perceived a new
move against him. A party of the enemy had made up their minds to test
the strength of their obstinate opponents; they pressed forward, and
got to within 80 yards of the stubbornly-held trenches. The position
seemed hopeless, but not for a moment did he flinch. Though the last
cartridge had been fired, the men still had their bayonets, and he
ordered them to charge.

Straight at the advancing enemy he rushed at the head of his handful of
men. The Germans were completely taken aback. They dared not fire, for
fear of hitting their own men, who were now in rear of the Grenadiers'
desperately defended position, and retired. Thereupon Captain Pryce
decided to take his men back to the trench again.

But by now the enemy had seen. They had realised the almost incredible
weakness of the hitherto unknown force, that had so long successfully
kept them at bay. And, restored to confidence, they came on once more.
Once more Captain Pryce led the tattered remnant of his company--that
now numbered only fourteen--to the charge, and when last seen they were
still fighting fearlessly and doggedly against overwhelming odds.

In all the glorious record of the Grenadiers there has been no story
more splendid than this. It was a Homeric combat--two battalions held
up (and the advance of a whole enemy division thus delayed) by a few
determined men. Of the losses they inflicted on their overwhelmingly
superior foe, some idea was gathered by Lieutenant Burt, who when
taken prisoner afterwards was shown by a German officer the heaps of
enemy dead in front of the British trenches. If ever a niche were
earned in the Temple of Fame it was by these brave men and their brave
leader--who, having already won a bar to his Military Cross, was
awarded the Victoria Cross for this crowning act of gallantry.

Meanwhile, No. 1 and No. 4 Companies, who had been enfiladed all
day, had lost all their officers. Captain H. Sloane-Stanley had been
killed and Captain Minchin wounded in three places, though he just
managed to crawl back afterwards, being fired at all the way. In No. 3
Company Lieutenant Lyon was killed, and subsequently the whole company
was surrounded and taken prisoners. The survivors of No. 1 and No. 4
Companies held on till night, although by then the Germans were in
rear of them, and finally managed to get back to the Australians. The
Headquarters of the Battalion took up a position in the evening just
south of the Forêt de Nieppe, in prolongation of the Australian line.
Although the line had been saved, the whole Brigade had been cut to
pieces. The Coldstream and Irish Guards had suffered the same fate as
the Grenadiers, and few of them got back to the Australian line.

By April 14 the 4th Battalion had been three days and three nights
fighting and digging without any rest, while of the nineteen officers
who went into action only two were left. The casualties were:

    Capt. H. H. Sloane-Stanley.               Killed.
    Capt. M. Chapman                             "
    Capt. T. T. Pryce, V.C., M.C.                "
    Lieut. N. R. Abbey                           "
    Lieut. F. C. Lyon                            "
    Lieut. C. S. Nash                         Wounded.
    Lieut. G. R. Green                           "
    2nd Lieut. J. E. Greenwood                   "
    Lieut. G. C. Burt                         Wounded and missing.
    2nd Lieut. H. Stratford (died of wounds)     "         "
    Lieut. the Hon. C. C. S. Rodney              "         "
    2nd Lieut. G. P. Philipps                    "         "
    Lieut. M. D. Thomas                          "         "
    2nd Lieut. G. W. Sich                        "         "
    2nd Lieut. P. H. Cox                         "         "

The total casualties amongst other ranks were 504, or 90 per cent of
the strength of the Battalion.

In the Brigade the casualties amounted to 39 officers and 1244 other
ranks.

The following message was sent by Lieut.-General Sir H. de B. de Lisle,
the Corps Commander, to General Sir H. S. Horne, commanding the First
Army:

    SECRET.                                    XV. Corps No. 608/13/70.
                                                  Dated 23-4-1918.
                                                     <i>31D</i>/211.A.

                              SECOND ARMY

   I forward the attached narrative of the action of the 4th
   Guards Brigade during the operations of the 11th to 14th April
   1918, for the information of the Army Commander.

   An account of the operations of the Corps as a whole is being
   prepared, but this record of the glorious stand against
   overwhelming odds made by the 4th Guards Brigade is of
   exceptional interest.

   The history of the British Army can record nothing finer than
   the story of the action of the 4th Guards Brigade on the 12th
   and 13th April 1918.

   The troops of the 29th and 31st Divisions by their stout
   defence covered the detrainment of the First Australian
   Division and saved Hazebrouck.

                               (Signed) BEAUVOIR DE LISLE,
                           Lieut.-General Commanding XV. Corps.

    XV. Corps.
      23-4-18.

                        Copy to 31st Division.

..............................

..............................

   Forwarded for your information.

                 (Signed)        W. H. ANNESLEY, Lieut.-Colonel,
    24-4-18.                     A.A. and Q.M.G., 31st Division.

General Sir H. S. Horne, commanding the First Army, telegraphed as
follows to the Commander of the Fifteenth Corps:

   I wish to express my appreciation of the great bravery and
   endurance with which all ranks have fought and held out
   (during the last five days) against overwhelming numbers.

   It has been necessary to call for great exertions and more
   must still be asked for, but I am quite confident that at this
   critical period, when the existence of the British Army is at
   stake, all ranks of the First Army will do their best.

                       (Signed)      H. S. HORNE, General,
                                    Commanding First Army.

Sir Douglas Haig in his Despatch of October 21 describes the fighting
as follows:

   Next day (April 12) the enemy followed up his attacks
   with great vigour, and the troops of the Twenty-ninth and
   Thirty-first Divisions, now greatly reduced in strength by
   the severe fighting already experienced, and strung out over
   a front of nearly 10,000 yards east of the Forêt de Nieppe,
   were once more tried to the utmost. Behind them the First
   Australian Division, under the command of Major-General Sir H.
   B. Walker, K.C.B., D.S.O., was in process of detraining, and
   the troops were told that the line was to be held at all costs
   until the detrainment could be completed.

   During the morning, which was very foggy, several determined
   attacks, in which a German armoured car came into action
   against the 4th Guards Brigade on the southern portion of
   our line, were repulsed with great loss to the enemy. After
   the failure of these assaults, he brought up field-guns to
   point-blank range, and in the northern sector, with their aid,
   gained _Vieux Berquin_. Everywhere except at _Vieux Berquin_
   the enemy's advance was held up all day by desperate fighting,
   in which our advanced posts displayed the greatest gallantry,
   maintaining their ground when entirely surrounded, men
   standing back to back in the trenches and shooting to front
   and rear.

 [Illustration:

   _Emery Walker. ph. sc._

  _Brigadier-General C. R. Champion de Crespigny D.S.O._
  ]

   In the afternoon the enemy made a further determined
   effort, and by sheer weight of numbers forced his way through
   the gaps in our depleted line, the surviving garrisons of our
   posts fighting where they stood to the last with bullet and
   bayonet. The heroic resistance of these troops, however, had
   given the leading Brigade of the First Australian Division
   time to reach and organise their appointed line east of the
   _Forêt de Nieppe_. These now took up the fight, and the way to
   _Hazebrouck_ was definitely closed.

   The performance of all the troops engaged in this most gallant
   stand, and especially that of the 4th Guards Brigade, on
   whose front of some 4000 yards the heaviest attacks fell, is
   worthy of the highest praise. No more brilliant exploit has
   taken place since the opening of the enemy's offensive, though
   gallant actions have been without number.

   The action of these troops, and indeed of all the Divisions
   engaged in the fighting in the Lys Valley, is the more
   noteworthy because, as already pointed out, practically the
   whole of them had been brought straight out of the Somme
   battlefield, where they had suffered severely and had been
   subjected to a great strain. All these Divisions, without
   adequate rest and filled with young reinforcements, which
   they had had no time to assimilate, were again hurriedly
   thrown into the fight, and in spite of the great disadvantages
   under which they laboured, succeeded in holding up the
   advance of greatly superior forces of fresh troops. Such an
   accomplishment reflects the greatest credit on the youth of
   Great Britain, as well as upon those responsible for the
   training of young soldiers sent out from home at this time.

Lieutenant C. Kerr of the 8th Battalion Australian Infantry afterwards
reported that, when the Australian Division was establishing a line of
defence for the troops in front to fall back upon, isolated parties
from the front arrived. Sergeant E. Shaw of the 4th Battalion on
reaching that line, collected all the men he could, and inquired where
he should take up a position; but Lieutenant Kerr, who knew what hard
fighting the Battalion had been through, offered to send these men back
to his Battalion Headquarters. Sergeant Shaw, however, asked permission
to stay in the line with his men until he received instructions to
join his battalion. A position behind the hedge near Seclin Farm was
allotted to these men, and there they stayed until the 15th, when they
received orders to join their battalion.

Lieutenant Kerr added in his report:

   The men of my company and battalion are full of admiration for
   the manner in which the Guards fought. We watched the fighting
   in the village and farms whilst consolidating new line. The
   moral effect on our troops of the stubborn resistance offered
   by these troops in denying ground to the enemy, the orderly
   withdrawal to our line, and the refusal of this sergeant
   to leave the line when offered the choice of comfortable
   quarters, was excellent.




                             CHAPTER XXXI

                        APRIL TO NOVEMBER 1918

                           THE 4TH BATTALION


[Sidenote: 4th Batt. April 1918.]

Lieut.-Colonel Pilcher brought the remnants of the 4th Battalion out
of the line on the 15th, and after halting for a few hours at Grand
Sec Bois, arrived at Borre. The billets into which the Battalion went,
were between Hazebrouck and Borre, and the men were glad to get a rest
after their hard fighting. Captain the Hon. F. E. Needham arrived,
and took over command of No. 1 Company, and Second Lieutenant P. G.
S. Gregson-Ellis, who joined at the same time, was posted to No. 2
Company. The Battalion was now so weak in numbers that Lieut.-Colonel
Pilcher organised it into two companies of three platoons each.
Being in reserve it was still in the area of operations, and on the
16th, while the Germans were shelling the back areas, one shell fell
in one of the billets, killing three men, and wounding five more,
including Company Sergeant-Major Pettit. On the 16th the Battalion
marched to La Kreule, moving on the next day into billets at La Halte.
Brigadier-General Butler found that these sadly depleted battalions
were difficult to work with, since at any time his Brigade might be
called upon to take over a portion of the line, and a battalion of six
platoons would be expected to hold trenches, occupied by a battalion up
to full strength. He therefore determined to make a composite battalion
of the 4th Battalion Grenadiers and the 3rd Battalion Coldstream, and
to place it under the command of Lieut.-Colonel Pilcher, with Major
Gillilan as Second in Command. In all the history of the two regiments
this had never been done before; not even at the first battle of
Ypres, where battalions of each regiment had been decimated, had any
amalgamation been attempted. This composite battalion now took over
from the 5th Battalion of the 2nd Australian Regiment the billets in
Le-Tir-Anglais, and was placed in support. During a severe shelling on
the 20th Second Lieutenant R. D. Richardson was severely wounded, and
died four days later. On the 22nd the composite battalion relieved the
King's Own Yorkshire Light Infantry in the front line, and came in for
a heavy bombardment of gas and high-explosive shells from the enemy's
artillery, during which Lieutenant R. Rolfe was killed. After three
days in the trenches the composite battalion moved back into support,
and now that drafts of men had been sent up to both battalions, it was
split up again into two. The officers of the 4th Battalion were:

    Lieut.-Colonel W. S. Pilcher, D.S.O.  Commanding Officer.
    Capt. C. R. Gerard                    Adjutant.
    Lieut. R. L. Murray-Lawes             Intelligence Officer.
    Capt. the Hon. F. E. Needham          No. 1 Company.
    Lieut. E.H. Tuckwell                    "     "
    Lieut. C.E. Irby                      No. 2 Company.
    2nd Lieut. P.G.S. Gregson-Ellis         "     "

On the 27th the Battalion proceeded to Hondeghem, where Lieutenant A.
A. Morris and Second Lieutenant the Hon. S. E. Marsham joined.

[Sidenote: May.]

At the beginning of May the 4th Guards Brigade was transferred from
the Second to the Third Army, and was placed directly under the orders
of General Headquarters. On the 21st it marched _via_ Wandicourt to
Saulty, where it remained until the end of the month.

The following officers arrived during May: Lieutenant M. P. B. Wrixon,
M.C., Second Lieutenant H. V. Gillett, Lieutenant J. E. Greenwood,
Lieutenant R. P. le Poer Trench.

[Sidenote: June.]

The Battalion remained at Saulty until the 11th, when it moved to La
Cauchie, where Captain J. H. C. Simpson and Lieutenant H. G. Wiggins
joined. On the 30th, after church parade, Field-Marshal His Royal
Highness the Duke of Connaught visited the Battalion.


[Sidenote: July.]

                       ROLL OF OFFICERS IN JULY

    Lieut.-Colonel W. S. Pilcher, D.S.O.      Commanding Officer.
    Major C. F. A. Walker, M.C.               Second in Command.
    Capt. C. R. Gerard, D.S.O.                Adjutant.
    Capt. I. H. Ingleby                       Act.-Quartermaster.
    Lieut. G. W. Selby-Lowndes                Transport Officer.
    Lieut. R. L. Murray-Lawes                 Intelligence Officer.
    Capt. the Hon. F. E. Needham              No. 1 Double Compy.
    Capt. J. H. C. Simpson                      "    "
    Lieut. R. P. le Poer Trench, M.C.           "    "
    Lieut. H. G. Wiggins, M.C.                  "    "
    Lieut. M. P. B. Wrixon, M.C.                "    "
    Lieut. J. E. Greenwood                      "    "
    2nd Lieut. the Hon. S. E. Marsham           "    "
    Capt. the Hon. A. H. L. Hardinge, M.C.    No. 2 Double Compy.
    Lieut. E. W. Nairn                          "    "
    Lieut. C. E. Irby, M.C.                     "    "
    2nd Lieut. A. F. Alington                   "    "
    2nd Lieut. P. G. S. Gregson-Ellis           "    "
    2nd Lieut. H. V. Gillett                    "    "
    Capt. N. Grellier, M.C., R.A.M.C.         Medical Officer.
    Capt. the Rev. E. Best                    Chaplain.

At the beginning of July the Battalion went to Criel Plage. On the
20th the third anniversary of the formation of the Battalion was duly
celebrated by a football match between the two half battalions, and a
Sergeants' dinner and concert, which Brigadier-General Butler attended.

[Sidenote: Aug.]

During August the Battalion remained at Criel Plage employed in
training and fatigue work. Lieutenant C. C. Cubitt joined.

[Sidenote: Sept.]

At the beginning of September Captain R. Wolrige-Gordon joined, and on
the 25th the Battalion proceeded to Hiermont, where it was placed under
the orders of the Cavalry Corps, as mobile infantry to be moved by
motor transport. On the 27th it moved to Rorcourt, and two days later
to Bray-sur-Somme, where it occupied a camp which had formerly been
used for German prisoners. On the 30th Lieutenant B. Layton, Second
Lieutenant A. G. Snelling, and Second Lieutenant W. R. Wearne arrived.


[Sidenote: Oct.]

             ROLL OF OFFICERS AT THE BEGINNING OF OCTOBER

    Lieut.-Colonel W. S. Pilcher, D.S.O.        Commanding Officer.
    Capt. C. R. Gerard, D.S.O.                  Adjutant.
    Capt. I. H. Ingleby                         Act.-Quartermaster.
    Lieut. G. W. Selby-Lowndes                  Transport Officer.
    Lieut. R. L. Murray-Lawes                   Intelligence Officer.
    Capt. R. Wolrige-Gordon, M.C.               No. 1 Double Compy.
    Lieut. B. C. Layton                           "         "
    Lieut. M. P. B. Wrixon, M.C.                  "         "
    Lieut. J. E. Greenwood                        "         "
    2nd Lieut. P. G. S. Gregson-Ellis             "         "
    Capt. the Hon. A. H. L. Hardinge, M.C.      No. 2 Double Compy.
    Capt. E. W. Nairn                             "         "
    Lieut. H. G. Wiggins, M.C.                    "         "
    2nd Lieut. C. E. Irby, M.C.                   "         "
    2nd Lieut. W. R. Wearne                       "         "
    2nd Lieut. H. V. Gillett                      "         "
    2nd Lieut. A. G. Snelling                     "         "
    Capt. N. Grellier, M.C., R.A.M.C.           Medical Officer.
    Capt. the Rev. E. Best                      Chaplain.

On October 3 the Battalion moved to Frise, and on the 8th to
Pœuilly. Its movements now depended on the Cavalry Corps, but as
there was no scope for the latter, since the country was enclosed
and full of barbed wire, its rôle was to march in the wake of the
divisions, which were driving the Germans in front of them. In order
to be at hand if wanted it was necessary to keep well up, and so the
column was constantly under shell-fire. On leaving Pœuilly the
Battalion marched to Bellenglise, moving on the following day to
Montbrehain, where the British lines advancing and the Germans retiring
could be plainly seen. On the 9th Major J. S. Hughes, M.C., arrived
and took up his duties as Second in Command. The march was continued
through Brancourt to Premont, where the main road was completely
blocked, as the retreating Germans had blown down the church, through
Montigny to Gouy, where the Battalion remained for three days. The
men had an opportunity of seeing Lesbœufs and Morval, which had
played so great a part in the battle of the Somme in 1916, and also the
Grenadiers' Memorial erected there. On the 21st Second Lieutenant M.
C. St. J. Hornby joined. On the 26th the 4th Guards Brigade left the
Cavalry Corps and received orders to join the Guards Division. For the
time being the Battalion was sent to its old billets in Criel, where
Lieutenant R. D. Leigh-Pemberton, M.C., and Second Lieutenant O. Scott
Russell joined, and there it remained until the Armistice was signed on
November 11.




                             CHAPTER XXXII

                         JULY AND AUGUST 1918

                          _Diary of the War_


[Sidenote: 1918.]

After some successes on a small scale by the French at St. Pierre
Aigle, and by the Americans at Château-Thierry, the Germans launched
their third and last offensive on a fifty-mile front in the direction
of Rheims, and penetrated the line to a depth of two to three miles.
Thirty German divisions took part in this battle, and the fighting was
very severe. On July 18 Marshal Foch began his brilliant counter-stroke
on a twenty-seven-mile front from Fontenoy to Belleau, and drove the
Germans back over the Marne, capturing a large number of prisoners.
Although in full retreat, the Germans continued to offer a stubborn
resistance, and counter-attacked all along the line.

In August Sir Douglas Haig struck with the Fourth Army under Sir Henry
Rawlinson, and succeeded in inflicting a crushing defeat on the Germans
and capturing 22,000 prisoners. Hardly had the enemy recovered from
this blow, when the Third Army under Sir Julian Byng advanced on a
nine-mile front, and recovered a large portion of the ground that had
been lost in the spring.

In Italy the Austrians were completely defeated by the Italians,
who took a large number of prisoners and guns, and the whole Piave
Delta was cleared. These successes were quickly followed up until the
Austrians were in full retreat.

In Albania the Allied Forces made considerable progress and compelled
the Austrians to retire.

In Palestine the British positions covering the passages of the Jordan
and the north of Jericho were attacked by the Turks.


                    OPERATIONS FROM AUGUST 21 TO 28

                         _Divisional Account_

[Sidenote: Aug.]

After Rawlinson's success on the Somme Byng was ordered to advance,
recover the Arras--Albert railway, and generally to hustle the Germans,
who were now falling slowly back. This was to be the prelude to the
main operation.

The attack on August 21 was planned and carried out at exceedingly
short notice, and was completely successful. The subsequent daily
attacks, executed in pursuance of the policy laid down by higher
authority, gave the enemy no rest and no opportunity of organising a
new line of resistance, but they rendered the task of coordination with
the division on the flanks almost impossible. By the time the position
of the advanced troops of the Guards Division at the end of the day's
fighting had been ascertained (probably not before 4 A.M.),
there was usually only just time to plan and issue orders for the next
day's operations. It seldom happened that the situation and intention
of the flank divisions could be ascertained before orders were issued,
with the result that each division had to work independently.

[Sidenote: Aug. 21.]

The Guards Division was at that time in the Sixth Corps, which had been
ordered to capture the Ablainzeville--Moyenneville spur on the morning
of the 21st. The attack was carried out by the Second Division on the
right, followed by the Third Division and 2nd Guards Brigade from the
Guards Division on the left, with the 5th Infantry Brigade from the
Second Division in reserve.

In the 2nd Guards Brigade (Sergison-Brooke) the attack was carried out
by the 1st Battalion Coldstream Guards and 1st Battalion Scots Guards,
with the 3rd Battalion Grenadier Guards in reserve. When the first
objectives had been secured the 3rd Battalion Grenadier Guards was
pushed through, and captured the line of the railway. The attack was
supported by seven brigades of field artillery and heavy guns under
Colonel Phipps. One company of the 4th Battalion Guards Machine Gun
Regiment was attached, and sixteen tanks (Mark IV.) were to co-operate.

The 1st Guards Brigade (with Gort temporarily in command) was ordered
to advance towards the railway, and be prepared to occupy Hamel Switch
in the event of the leading brigade finding it unoccupied. There
was very thick mist in the early morning, and the contact patrols
were unable to work, but the enemy had expected this attack, and
had withdrawn all his guns, leaving only a very small garrison in
the forward area. Moyenneville was secured without difficulty, while
the Second Division captured Courcelles. On reaching the railway the
resistance stiffened; and when General Sergison-Brooke reported that
all the tanks appeared to have been drawn away south-east, and that
there were none operating on the front of the Brigade, Major-General
Feilding warned him that no advance beyond the railway must be
attempted without them. In the meantime the Third Division on the right
had some stiff fighting on the railway, and the Fifty-ninth Division
on the left made some progress towards Boisieux St. Marc. Gort's
Brigade reached the quarries on the other side of the railway in the
afternoon, and found there was heavy hostile shelling from the north
of Courcelles. That night the patrols entered Hamelincourt Trench, and
early the next morning the Germans counter-attacked, but failed to
eject the companies which were occupying Hamel Works.

[Sidenote: Aug. 22.]

On the 22nd orders were issued for a farther advance the next day.
Brigadier-General Sergison-Brooke, in command of the 2nd Guards
Brigade, was instructed to advance. On his left the Third and
Fifty-sixth Divisions would operate, and on his right the Second
Division would capture Gomiecourt. The enemy was to be pressed
continuously in order to conform to the attack by British and French
troops elsewhere. On the 23rd the enemy shelled Boiry with gas and
high-explosive shells, but did not offer any serious resistance.
Sergison-Brooke's 2nd Guards Brigade met with little opposition, and
gained all their objectives along Hamelincourt Trench, capturing Hamel
Mound. Orders were then sent to Brigadier-General Sergison-Brooke to
advance on the line Judas Farm--St. Leger Mill, while Brigadier-General
Follett was told to move up the 3rd Guards Brigade, and be prepared to
relieve the 2nd Guards Brigade in the evening. Meanwhile the Second
Division had captured Ervillers.

The great feature of the day's fighting was the advance of the 1st
Battalion Grenadier Guards, which had been placed at the disposal of
General Sergison-Brooke. After a long approach march, this Battalion,
advancing with both flanks exposed, passed through Sergison-Brooke's
Brigade, and seized the key-position south-west of St. Leger. The
capture of this position enabled the divisions on both flanks to
advance the following day with little loss.

[Sidenote: Aug. 23.]

That night when the 3rd Guards Brigade relieved the 2nd, the Guards
Division had reached the line running through Mory Switch as far as
Judas Trench, thence to Judas Farm, and on to Boyelles Reserve, where
it was in touch with the Fifty-sixth Division.

The next morning--the 24th--the 3rd Guards Brigade continued the
pursuit of the Germans, and was ordered to advance on St. Leger, which
was not to be entered by the battalions engaged in the attack, as the
battalion in reserve would be responsible for the "mopping up" of the
town. This advance was successfully accomplished, but after St. Leger
had been secured, it was found impossible to make any further progress
until Mory Copse was cleared. The Second Division was accordingly
ordered to take and hold Mory Copse, while the 3rd Guards Brigade was
to push forward at once, and conform to the general advance. As soon as
Mory and Mory Copse had been secured, the Second Division advanced on
Behagnies and Sapignies.

[Sidenote: Aug. 25.]

The attack continued on the 25th, and the Guards Division advanced
towards Ecouste and Longatte _via_ Bank's Trench and Bank's Reserve,
while the Fifty-sixth Division tried to gain the Hindenburg
support line. The occupation of Behagnies and part of Sapignies
was successfully accomplished by the Second Division on the right.
Follett's 3rd Guards Brigade advanced supported by tanks, but these
were quickly put out of action by the anti-tank rifles of the Germans.
Considerable resistance was met with in Leger Wood, and there was heavy
hostile machine-gun fire from Croisilles. The 1st Battalion Grenadier
Guards made a wonderfully fine advance on the right of the Brigade,
but was strongly counter-attacked and suffered heavy casualties. The
Sixty-second Division was unable to capture Mory on account of the
division on its right being held up; later in the evening it succeeded
in reaching Camouflage Copse. That night De Crespigny's 1st Guards
Brigade relieved the 3rd Guards Brigade.

The following day orders for a further attack were issued. The advance
was to be continued by the Sixty-second, Fifty-sixth, and Guards
Divisions, the latter directed on high ground north and south of
Ecouste and Longatte, while the Fifty-sixth Division was to envelop
Croisilles, moving down the Hindenburg line. The advance was not to be
pressed if strong resistance was encountered. The 1st Guards Brigade
was to advance under barrage in a line from Croisilles Copse to the
Crucifix, and the heavy artillery was to concentrate on Sensee Valley.

[Sidenote: Aug. 27.]

Early on the 27th the Sixty-second Division captured Bank's Trench,
and De Crespigny's Brigade reached Burnhill Trench. Here the 2nd
Battalion Grenadier Guards was held up by heavy machine-gun fire, while
the 2nd Battalion Coldstream Guards was counter-attacked from both
flanks, and driven back to the line of Leger Reserve--Bank's Trench.
The Fifty-sixth Division was also in difficulties, and could make no
headway against the machine-gun fire from Croisilles. The situation
as regards the Guards Division was as follows: On the right the 2nd
Battalion Grenadier Guards was in touch with the Sixty-second Division
on the ridge south-west of L'Homme Mort, the line then reaching a
sunken road leading to St. Leger. There were some men in Bank's Trench,
but there were also isolated parties of the enemy still there, which
made reorganisation impossible until dark. Major-General Feilding sent
orders to Brigadier-General de Crespigny to reorganise the battalions
in front, and to endeavour to secure the line from Bank's Trench to
Leger Reserve. If it was found that the Germans had withdrawn, the 76th
Brigade was to pass through the 1st Guards Brigade and follow them
up. During the night Bank's Trench was cleared of Germans, and 150
prisoners were taken.

On the 28th De Crespigny's Brigade was holding a line along Mory
Switch--Bank's Trench and St. Leger Reserve, and the enemy was reported
to have withdrawn to Longatte support. At mid-day the Fifty-sixth
Division captured Croisilles, and continued its advance towards
Bullecourt. The whole of Bank's Trench up to the Mory--Ecoust road had
now fallen into the hands of De Crespigny's Brigade, and patrols had
been sent out some way in front. During the day the Germans withdrew
towards Ecoust and Bullecourt, followed by our patrols. Orders were
given for this brigade to be relieved by the 76th Infantry Brigade,
and to retire to the area between the Arras--Bapaume road and the
Arras--Albert railway.

The total number of prisoners taken by the Division from the 21st to
the 29th was 30 officers, and 1479 other ranks.

The casualties were: Killed, 28 officers, 278 other ranks; wounded, 58
officers, 1675 other ranks; missing, 3 officers, 239 other ranks.

[Sidenote: 1st. Batt.]


                           THE 1ST BATTALION

                           _July and August_

                           ROLL OF OFFICERS

    Lieut.-Colonel Viscount Gort, D.S.O.,
      M.V.O., M.C.                           Commanding Officer.
    Major the Hon. W. R. Bailey, D.S.O.      Second in Command.
    Capt. R. D. Lawford, M.C.                Adjutant.
    2nd Lieut. E. G. Hawkesworth             Intelligence Officer.
    Lieut. R. F. W. Echlin                   Transport Officer.
    Capt. J. Teece, M.C.                     Quartermaster.
    Capt. P. Malcolm                         King's Company.
    Lieut. J. A. Lloyd                          "    "
    Lieut. L. G. Byng, M.C.                     "    "
    2nd Lieut. R. G. Buchanan                   "    "
    2nd Lieut. C. O. Rocke                      "    "
    Capt. A. T. G. Rhodes                     No. 2 Company.
    Lieut. G. Hughes                            "    "
    2nd Lieut. J. L. Campbell                   "    "
    Capt. A. A. Moller, M.C.                  No. 3 Company.
    2nd Lieut. A. Grant                         "    "
    2nd Lieut. A. A. J. Warner                  "    "
    2nd Lieut. L. F. A. d'Erlanger              "    "
    Capt. R. Wolrige-Gordon, M.C.             No. 4 Company.
    Lieut. the Hon. P. P. Cary                  "    "
    Lieut. H. B. Vernon                         "    "
    Lieut. B. H. Jones                          "    "
    2nd Lieut. R. L. Webber                     "    "
    2nd Lieut. A. M. Brown                      "    "
    Lieut. W. B. Evans, U.S.A.M.O.R.C.        Medical Officer.

[Sidenote: July.]

After six days spent at Barly, the 1st Battalion marched to
Bavincourt, where it entrained for Blaireville. On arrival the men
were provided with tea and cigarettes by the Thirty-second Division,
and the Battalion took over trench shelters from the 2nd Battalion
Manchester Regiment, whose Adjutant was Captain Kaye, formerly a
sergeant in the King's Company, and whose Second in Command was Major
Marshall, late Irish Guards. On the 10th the Battalion relieved the
2nd Battalion Scots Guards, which was the battalion in support, and
some high-velocity shells fell in its area, wounding three men. On
the 14th the Battalion moved up to the front line, which had become
very slippery owing to the heavy rainstorms, and the ground was so
deep in mud in some places that the relief was not completed till 2
A.M. The enemy was quiet on the whole, but some movement
was observed round Boyelles. The following day the Germans showed
an inclination to push machine-guns forward on the south side of
the railway in order to get close to our lines. Hostile aircraft
was more active, but was kept well in hand, and in the evening two
German aeroplanes were brought down near Hamelincourt. On the 19th
the Battalion was relieved, and retired to the reserve line trenches.
The period spent in reserve was uneventful, but on the 27th, when
the Battalion had moved up in support, the Germans carried out a
concentrated gas bombardment of the area Boisleux-au-Mont village and
station, and eight men in No. 4 Company were gassed. On the 30th Second
Lieutenant J. L. Campbell, Company Sergeant-Major Frost, and two men
were wounded during some severe shelling. The former recovered, but
Sergeant-Major Frost succumbed to the wounds he had received, and died
that evening. On the 31st six platoons from the 320th Regiment of the
American Army, in addition to the Second in Command and the Lewis-gun
officer, were attached to the Battalion. The enemy's artillery that
evening showed an increased activity, and put down a destructive
barrage which lasted for three hours.

[Sidenote: Aug.]

From the 1st to the 6th of August the 1st Battalion was in the front
line at Boisleux-au-Mont, where, except for intermittent shelling,
everything was unusually quiet. During one of the periods of shelling
Lieutenant G. Hughes was severely wounded, and died in the evening.
There were 2 men killed and 11 wounded, in addition to two of the
American troops. On the 6th the Battalion returned to the reserve
trenches at Blaireville, where it remained until the 15th. In the
absence of Brigadier-General de Crespigny, Lord Gort assumed temporary
command of the 1st Guards Brigade, and Major Bailey commanded the
Battalion. On the 21st Sergison-Brooke's Brigade attacked in a thick
mist on the right of the 3rd Guards Brigade, and the Germans put down
a heavy barrage of shells and Minenwerfer on the trenches occupied by
the 1st Battalion. The mist rendered smoke-bombs useless, and a patrol
was sent out to get touch with the enemy, who was expected to retire.
Lieutenant Hawkesworth with nine men entered Marc trench supported by
a platoon from No. 3 Company, and captured two Germans; a strong party
of the enemy which tried to recapture them, was beaten off with several
men killed. On the 22nd the Battalion was relieved, and proceeded to
Boiry St. Martin.

[Sidenote: Aug. 23.]

In accordance with General Follett's order, the 2nd Battalion Scots
Guards and 1st Battalion Welsh Guards moved to the low ground east of
Ayette, while the 1st Battalion Grenadier Guards was ordered to send
an officer to Brigade Headquarters. Lieutenant Hawkesworth, who was
selected for this duty, sent back word that the Battalion was to be
ready to march at once. At 12.50 P.M. Major Bailey received
orders to move up his Battalion to the east of Moyenneville, and
to report to Sergison-Brooke's Brigade as soon as he arrived there.
Accordingly the Battalion marched off, and reached its destination
about 3.15 P.M. There was no time to issue written orders,
and General Sergison-Brooke was able to explain only verbally to Major
Bailey the objective of the Battalion. Having summoned his Company
Commanders, Major Bailey informed them of the general situation. The
3rd Battalion Grenadier Guards and 1st Battalion Scots Guards were
holding the general line of Hamerville trench and also Hamel trench,
while the 1st Battalion Coldstream Guards was established on the high
ground about Judas Farm. The situation on the right, however, was not
clear, and no troops of the Second Division had been seen east of
Ervillers. The 1st Battalion was therefore to move forward as soon as
possible, gain touch with the Second Division about Ervillers, and in
conjunction with it, capture Mory Switch.


          LIST OF OFFICERS WHO TOOK PART IN THESE OPERATIONS

    Major the Hon. W. R. Bailey, D.S.O.      Commanding Officer.
    Lieut. J. A. Lloyd                       Acting Adjutant.
    Lieut. E. G. Hawkesworth                 Intelligence Officer.
    Captain P. Malcolm                       King's Company.
    Captain the Hon. P. P. Cary                 "    "
    2nd Lieut. C. Cruttenden                    "    "
    2nd Lieut. C. O. Rocke.                     "    "
    Lieut. H. B. Vernon                      No. 2 Company.
    Lieut. A. A. Morris                         "    "
    2nd Lieut. R. J. E. Conant                  "    "
    Captain A. S. Chambers                   No. 3 Company.
    2nd Lieut. G. S. Lamont                     "    "
    2nd Lieut. A. A. J. Warner                  "    "
    Captain R. Wolrige-Gordon, M.C.          No. 4 Company.
    Lieut. L. G. Byng, M.C.                     "    "
    2nd Lieut. G. E. Barber                     "    "
    2nd Lieut. R. L. Webber                     "    "
    Capt. W. B. Evans, U.S.A.M.O.R.C.        Medical Officer.

At 4.10 P.M. the Battalion advanced in approach march formation with
the King's Company under Captain Cary on the right, and No. 2 Company
under Lieutenant H. B. Vernon on the left, with No. 3 Company under
Captain Chambers in support and No. 4 Company under Lieutenant Byng in
reserve. The frontage occupied by the Battalion was 1000 yards, with
strong patrols preceding the two leading companies at a distance of 300
yards. On reaching the line of the Ervillers--Hamelincourt road, the
leading companies came under a light field-gun barrage and long-range
machine-gun fire, which forced them to deploy, and the support company
conformed as soon as it arrived at the same place. Captain Chambers
then moved his company to a position écheloned in rear of the King's
Company, so as to be in a position to protect the right flank. When
the leading companies reached the neighbourhood of Jewel trench,
the Germans offered a certain amount of resistance, which caused a
momentary check, but the threat of an outflanking movement by No. 3
Company broke down their defence, and they fled, pursued by Lewis-gun
and rifle fire, leaving fifty men who were taken prisoners.

No. 4 Company was moved to a position on the high ground on the right
to cover that flank, and was given orders to be prepared to move across
the front of Ervillers, if a hostile counter-attack developed in that
direction. The other three companies swept on to the next objective,
which was carried without a further check. The three leading companies
then proceeded forward to capture the final objective, and the defence
of the enemy broke down, as soon as he saw that the victorious advance
of the Battalion could not be stopped. By 5.45 P.M. the position was
completely in the hands of the Battalion, many prisoners being taken,
numbers of whom rushed forward with their hands up as soon as the
leading companies appeared over the ridge. After the final objective
had been secured, No. 4 Company returned to its proper position in
reserve, its place on the right being taken by a sub-section of
machine-guns. At dusk the Battalion was distributed as follows: No. 3
Company in Mory Switch trench as far as Hally Avenue (exclusive), No. 2
Company conformed from Hally Avenue (inclusive) to Judas trench, while
the King's Company formed a refused right flank in shell-slits about
Iscariot Work, and No. 4 Company was in reserve in Jewel trench.

Considering the extent of ground that had been covered and the rapidity
with which the objective had been secured, the casualties were not
heavy: Lieutenant Rocke, who had been with the leading platoon of the
King's Company, was killed, and Captain Cary in the King's Company
and Lieutenant Conant of No. 2 Company were wounded. The casualties
amongst other ranks amounted to about forty.

[Sidenote: Aug. 24.]

At 4 A.M. Major Bailey received orders to continue the attack,
and summoned a conference of Company Commanders. He explained to them
that the Battalion was to advance at 7 A.M. on a front of 1000
yards and écheloned in depth. No. 4 Company was to lead the attack on a
front of 500 yards, with the left flank on Hally Avenue; No. 3 Company
écheloned at a distance of 250 yards on their right, No. 2 Company in
support, covering the centre at a distance of 250 yards behind the left
of No. 3 Company, and the King's Company in reserve.

The three leading companies were formed up by daylight in Mory Switch
trench, but the King's Company remained in its position near Iscariot
Work. The wire in front of Mory was too thick to cut before daylight,
and the men were told to work their way through the gaps as best they
could. As soon as the attack started, some thirty prisoners were taken;
they were in positions outside the wire, and surrendered without firing
a shot. A shrapnel barrage had been put down by our artillery, but it
was placed too far in advance to be of any real assistance, and as the
attack developed the Germans opened an intense machine-gun fire from
Mory Copse and Hally Copse. It soon became evident that, until some
advance was made on the right, there was no possibility of the attack
succeeding, and even if it did succeed there seemed little prospect
of the 1st Battalion retaining the position it had gained, unless the
Second Division could keep pace with them. Nothing could be done but
to wait until the situation on the right developed, and the difficulty
of the position was increased by the fact that all communication with
the leading companies was cut off for the remainder of the day. During
the morning Germans could be seen dribbling forward small parties to
Mory Copse, and the sniping and machine-gun fire from this direction
became more intense. At 10.45 the Second Division made an attempt
to come up on the right, but was immediately checked and suffered
considerably.

The casualties in the 1st Battalion were naturally heavy. Second
Lieutenant G. E. Barber was killed, and Lieutenant L. G. Byng, M.C.,
was so severely wounded that he died that evening. Major Bailey,
Captain Chambers, Lieutenant Vernon, Second Lieutenant Warner, and
Second Lieutenant Webber were wounded, and amongst the other ranks
there were 150 casualties.

Lord Gort, who had been temporarily commanding the 1st Guards Brigade,
returned to the Battalion that evening, and Captain Wolrige-Gordon,
M.C., came up to take over command of No. 4 Company, while Lieutenant
Hawkesworth left Battalion Headquarters to command No. 3 Company. On
learning that the Brigade was to continue the attack on the following
day with the assistance of eight tanks, Lord Gort went round the
line at dusk, and decided that, as the King's and No. 3 Companies
had suffered fewest casualties, they should undertake the attack. He
therefore gave orders for these two companies to withdraw for the
night, and get as much rest as they could in Mory Switch, while No.
2 and 4 Companies should supply the outposts; and he impressed on
the officers commanding these companies, that in view of the attack
the next day the men should be spared as much as possible, and that
defensive measures for the night should be undertaken mainly by patrols.

[Sidenote: Aug. 25.]

After consultation with the officers commanding the 2nd Battalion
Scots Guards, the 1st Battalion Welsh Guards, and the tanks, Lord
Gort returned to his Battalion Headquarters, and summoned the Company
Commanders--Second Lieutenant Cruttenden, King's Company; Lieutenant
A. A. Morris, No. 2 Company; Lieutenant Hawkesworth, No. 3 Company;
and Captain Wolrige-Gordon, No. 4 Company. The details of the attack
were explained, and orders were issued. The total fighting strength of
the Battalion was only 212 with 7 officers, including the Battalion
Headquarters Staff.

In order to increase the number of officers, Captain Malcolm was sent
up to join the King's Company. He received this order only at 10
P.M. the night before, and the distance he had to go made it
most improbable that he could reach the Battalion before the attack
started. But his determination to lead the King's Company into action
helped him to overcome all difficulties. By dint of riding and walking
all night over appalling country, without any guide, he managed to find
the Battalion in time.

At 4.30 A.M. the attack started. A very thick mist covered
the ground, which made it difficult for the tanks to find their way.
Lieutenant Hawkesworth started off with No. 3 Company supported by one
tank, but when he reached the neighbourhood of Bank's Trench the tank
broke down, and when the fog lifted he found he had only forty men
quite unsupported. Unfortunately, at this moment he was badly wounded,
and therefore ordered his men, who were without an officer, to fall
back on to Mory Switch.

The King's and No. 4 Companies moved up Mory Switch supported by one
tank, while another worked on the southern flank. The fog was still
thick, and as the first tank advanced it was suddenly engaged at very
close range by a stray machine-gun post. Armour-piercing bullets
were used, and the engine and water jacket were penetrated. It was
therefore necessary to find the other tank, which could be heard
working in the fog, and after an unsuccessful attempt to get it going
in the right direction, it eventually succeeded in moving forward at
8.30 A.M., supported by the King's Company and a platoon of
No. 4 Company. But soon afterwards the fog lifted, and the tank was
immediately put out of action. Germans in bodies of fifty and one
hundred could be seen standing about in Bank's Trench, but as the
King's Company and a platoon of No. 3 Company were close by, Lord Gort
did not give the order to engage these hostile parties with machine-gun
fire, until he could ascertain if they were prisoners surrendering or
not. After a lapse of five minutes fire was opened on them, and they
disappeared into their trenches. Meanwhile the enemy opened a very
heavy and concentrated machine-gun fire on Mory Switch, and engaged the
disabled tank with a field-gun. Lord Gort having been called back to
Battalion Headquarters to speak to the Brigadier on the telephone with
reference to the attack of the Sixty-second Division, which was timed
to begin at 9 A.M., ordered Captain Wolrige-Gordon to hold
on to Mory Switch and Camouflage Copse. But the enfilade machine-gun
fire made this impossible, more especially as the right flank was quite
unsupported, and the three companies had to withdraw from Mory Switch
to the north-west of Mory.

At 4 P.M. after a severe bombardment the Germans developed
a counter-attack, which was met by the Sixty-second Division, and
driven back. Battalions of this division returned to the attack, and
regained some ground, while the 1st Battalion reoccupied Mory Switch.
Lord Gort told the captain of the leading company of the battalion
from the Sixty-second Division that he was prepared to push on to the
sunken road, if his company would co-operate, but the Company Commander
replied that the right flank of his battalion was entirely unsupported,
and that therefore any further advance was out of the question. The
Sixty-second Division was subsequently withdrawn to the line from which
they started, but the 1st Battalion was able to maintain its position
and to clear Hally Copse of the enemy. That night it withdrew to Boiry
St. Martin, and was relieved by the 2nd Battalion Grenadier Guards.

Captain Malcolm and Second Lieutenant Cruttenden were reported
missing, and Lieutenant Hawkesworth was wounded. The total number of
casualties during the three days' fighting was 13 officers and 258
other ranks, out of 18 officers and 489 other ranks who were engaged
in the operations. 250 prisoners, 1 field-gun, and 20 machine-guns, in
addition to several trench mortars, were captured by the Battalion.

In a letter which Brigadier-General G. B. S. Follett, commanding
the 3rd Guards Brigade, wrote to Sir Henry Streatfeild, the
Lieutenant-Colonel commanding the Regiment, he said:

   As you have probably heard by now, we attacked on the 23rd,
   24th, and 25th August--that is, this Brigade. The 1st
   Battalion Grenadiers gave the finest exhibition that has ever
   been made in this war. At 3 P.M. on the 23rd they
   were sent up to protect the right flank of the 2nd Brigade and
   take the heights south of St. Leger. There was just time to
   issue verbal orders and to collect the Company Commanders for
   a conference. Starting about 3.45 P.M. they had taken
   all objectives before 6 P.M.--that is, advancing
   5000 yards from their starting point! Having been very highly
   trained by Gort during the past month or two, they proceeded
   to put their training into practice, with the result that it
   was a wonderful success. Commanded by Bailey (Gort was with
   the 1st Guards Brigade), they were magnificently manœuvred
   by their company and platoon commanders, moving in great depth
   on a very wide extension. They captured 197 prisoners, 15
   machine-guns and several trench mortars, and killed a lot.
   Their casualties were 2 officers and 50 O.R. I say again, the
   finest attack in open warfare that has ever been made. During
   the night 23-24 they even did a relief, and we were up against
   the junction of two fresh divisions in great strength, with
   the result that no great advance was made and many losses.

[Sidenote: Aug. 26-31.]

After remaining for twenty-four hours at Boiry St. Martin, the
Battalion marched to Berles-au-Bois, where it occupied shelters in a
bank. Lieutenant E. B. Shelley and twenty-five men joined, in addition
to a large draft from the 4th Battalion under Captain Simpson, and the
following days were spent in reorganising the companies.


                           THE 2ND BATTALION

                           ROLL OF OFFICERS

    Lieut.-Colonel G. E. C. Rasch, D.S.O.          Commanding Officer.
    Capt. G. C. FitzH. Harcourt-Vernon, D.S.O.     Second in Command.
    Capt. A. H. Penn, M.C.                         Adjutant.
    Lieut. R. G. Briscoe, M.C.                     Assistant Adjutant.
    2nd Lieut. S. C. K. George                     Intelligence Officer.
    Lieut. G. G. M. Vereker, M.C.                  Transport Officer.
    Capt. the Hon. W. E. Acraman, M.C., D.C.M.     Quartermaster.
    2nd Lieut. J. S. Carter                        Bombing Officer.
    2nd Lieut. H. B. G. Morgan                     Lewis-Gun Officer.
    Capt. F. A. M. Browning, D.S.O.                No. 1 Company.
    Lieut. S. T. S. Clarke, M.C.                     "     "
    Lieut. L. St. L. Hermon-Hodge                    "     "
    Lieut. G. F. Lawrence                            "     "
    2nd Lieut. R. C. M. Bevan                        "     "
    Capt. O. Martin Smith                          No. 2 Company.
    Lieut. R. H. R. Palmer                           "     "
    Lieut. W. H. S. Dent                             "     "
    Capt. J. C. Cornforth, M.C.                    No. 3 Company.
    Lieut. R. M. Oliver                              "     "
    2nd Lieut. H. White                              "     "
    2nd Lieut. F. J. Langley                         "     "
    2nd Lieut. the Hon. S. A. S. Montagu             "     "
    Lieut. F. H. J. Drummond, M.C.                 No. 4 Company.
    Lieut. F. P. Loftus                              "     "
    Lieut. N. McK. Jesper                            "     "
    2nd Lieut. P. V. Pelly                           "     "
    2nd Lieut. J. A. Paton                           "     "
    Capt. the Rev. Hon. C. F. Lyttelton            Chaplain.
    Capt. J. L. Early, U.S.A.M.O.R.C.              Medical Officer.

[Sidenote: July.]

The 2nd Battalion, which had been training during the first few days
in July at Saulty, proceeded by train on the 5th to Ransart, where
tea was provided for the men by the Thirty-second Division. Guides
from the Royal Scots led the Battalion to the position which it was to
take up as reserve battalion of the brigade 500 yards east of Ransart.
The Guards Division was occupying a sector of the line with its right
joining the Second Division between Ayette and Moyenneville, and its
left joining the Canadian Corps on the outskirts of Boisieux St. Marc.
While in reserve, companies carried out training round the outskirts of
Ransart, and scouting and patrolling by day were practised. In order
to accustom the men to night-work they wore darkened glasses, which
produced much the same effect as night. On the 11th the Battalion moved
up into support, and relieved the 1st Battalion Irish Guards near the
outskirts of Hendecourt. A place was found for a cricket-ground in a
sheltered valley, and two matches were played with composition balls
and bats made by the pioneers. From the 17th to the 23rd the Battalion
went up into the front line, which had been formerly held by isolated
posts, but which was now a continuous trench. The weather was fine and
the casualties were not heavy, although there was usually a certain
amount of shelling in the early morning. From the 24th to the 28th the
Battalion returned to the reserve trenches at Ransart, when Lieutenant
T. A. Combe, Lieutenant M. H. Ponsonby, Second Lieutenant A. P. J. M.
P. de Lisle, and Second Lieutenant D. L. King joined the Battalion.
During the days in reserve an increasing stream of American officers
were attached to the 1st Guards Brigade for instruction, and the
following amusing messages show the excellent relations that existed
between the officers of the two armies:

    From:--Guards Division Q.
    To:--Transport Officer, 1st Guards Brigade.

   Draw 6 bottles of Whisky from Divisional Soldiers Club and
   deliver to Brigade H.Q. for American Officers attached.

    From G.O.C. 1st Guards Brigade.
    To:--Guards Division Q.

   On behalf of all officers of the American Army attached to
   the Brigade under my command, I wish to express my deepest
   thanks for the courteous present of whisky foreshadowed in
   your message. I am requested to add that these officers accept
   this gift as a proof of the solidarity of the union existing
   between the American and British nations, which will endure
   until the whisky runs out.

                                       C. R. C. DE CRESPIGNY,
                                          Brigadier-General.

[Sidenote: Aug.]

While the Battalion was in support at Hendecourt, Captain A. H. Penn,
M.C., resigned the adjutancy, much to the regret of all ranks, and
was succeeded by Captain R. G. Briscoe, M.C. On August 4 the Battalion
went up into the front line in front of Boiry St. Martin, and on August
5 six platoons of Americans who were to be initiated in the mysteries
of trench warfare were attached for four days. The enemy was, however,
not very active, and there was but little shelling. From the 10th to
the 16th the Battalion remained in reserve at Ransart, where Lieutenant
G. F. Lawrence took on the duties of Intelligence Officer from Second
Lieutenant S. C. K. George, who was invalided home with dysentery. On
the 18th the Battalion relieved the 320th American Regiment in the
front line, where again the enemy was fairly quiet. Two advanced posts
were established some 500 yards from the line, and the nights were
spent in active patrolling to prevent the enemy occupying the dead
ground in front of Moyenneville, which was to become the forming-up
area for the attack on the 21st.

After three days spent in the reserve, the Battalion moved up into very
inadequate trench accommodation in Boiry St. Martin. These trenches
were now the reserve line, and out of range of enemy artillery owing to
the advance on the 21st.

[Sidenote: Aug. 25.]

On the afternoon of the 25th the Battalion marched off to relieve a
battalion in the 3rd Guards Brigade. A three hours' uncomfortable
halt was made in a field at Hamelincourt, and as the ground had been
well covered with gas, the companies had to move about to escape the
drifting fumes. Respirators had to be worn, which rendered the eating
of the evening meal no easy matter.

The relief in the front line of St. Leger was carried out without a
hitch, although complicated by the fact that the Battalion was taking
over a wide and sketchy front from the remnants of the 1st Battalion
Grenadier Guards and the 1st Battalion Scots Guards. During the night
Second Lieutenant H. A. Finch and eight men went out as a patrol to
get in touch with the enemy and never returned. Second Lieutenant
Finch was found killed 1000 yards in front of the line, when the
Battalion advanced, which showed how thoroughly he had carried out his
instructions.

August 26 was a very quiet day, with occasional shelling around Mory
Trench. Judging by the extent to which he fired his machine-guns after
dark, the enemy seemed very apprehensive. The following officers took
part in the operations on August 26-28:

    Lieut.-Colonel G. E. C. Rasch, D.S.O.      Commanding Officer.
    Lieut. R. G. Briscoe, M.C.                 Adjutant.
    Lieut. G. F. Lawrence                      Intelligence Officer.
    Lieut. M. H. Ponsonby                      No. 1 Company.
    Lieut. N. McK. Jesper                         "     "
    Lieut. C. C. T. Giles                         "     "
    Capt. O. Martin Smith                      No. 2 Company.
    Lieut. C. Gwyer                               "     "
    2nd Lieut. A. P. J. M. P. de Lisle            "     "
    Capt. J. C. Cornforth, M.C.                No. 3 Company.
    Lieut. H. White                               "     "
    Lieut. R. M. Oliver                           "     "
    2nd Lieut. F. J. Langley                      "     "
    Lieut. H. B. G. Morgan                     No. 4 Company.
    2nd Lieut. J. A. Paton                        "     "
    1st Lieut. E. L. Major (U.S.A. Army)       Medical Officer.

[Sidenote: Aug. 26.]

At midnight on the 26th a conference held at Battalion Headquarters
was attended by all Company Commanders, at which Lieut.-Colonel Rasch
explained the general situation and the objectives of the advance for
the following day as far as they were known.

Definite orders were not received until 1.30 A.M. on the
morning of the 27th. The instructions the Battalion received were to
push forward at zero hour (7 A.M.), with the 2nd Battalion
Coldstream Guards on its left, and the Sixty-second Division on its
right, and to secure the enemy's trenches in and south of Ecoust and
Longatte. Before dawn the Battalion was to be reorganised and disposed
in battle formation. No. 3 Company under Captain J. C. Cornforth, M.C.,
extended along the whole Battalion frontage of 1500 yards, along the
road in No Man's Land, running from Mory Copse to St. Leger. No. 2
Company under Captain O. M. Smith in left support lay concealed until
zero in Hally Copse. No. 4 Company under Lieutenant Morgan was in right
support in Mory Copse, and No. 1 Company under Lieutenant M. Ponsonby
in reserve, with Battalion Headquarters in Mory Trench.

There were three points in these orders which caused a little
uneasiness. In the first place, a very short space of time before
dawn was allowed to re-dispose the Battalion, although fortunately
strong patrols had been sent out earlier in the night to secure the
Mory Copse--St. Leger road. In the second place, dawn being at 4.30
A.M. and zero at 7 A.M., No. 3 Company would be in an exposed position
during daylight at some points within fifty yards of the enemy. It
was a clear night, and even in the darkness this company got into
difficulties, for while they were forming up, they were observed by the
enemy, who spent the rest of the night sweeping the ground and putting
up innumerable lights, probably thinking it was a patrol. Fortunately
there were a number of large felled tree-trunks along the road, which
enabled this Company to escape detection from ground observation, and
from the low-flying aeroplanes, which continually patrolled No Man's
Land at dawn. In the third place, although Bank's Trench was known to
be held all along the whole front, the barrage table showed that on the
left of the Battalion the barrage would open a considerable distance
behind the trench, probably owing to the proximity of our front troops
to the enemy position.

The reorganisation and forming up of the Battalion were successfully
carried out before dawn. Unfortunately, while No. 1 Company was moving
across the open to take up its position in reserve, a shell fell in the
centre of No. 1 Platoon, mortally wounding Lieutenant M. Ponsonby, and
causing casualties to the whole platoon, with the exception of three
other ranks. Lieutenant Jesper took command of the remaining three
platoons, and brought them to their allotted positions.

[Sidenote: Aug. 27.]

At zero hour (7 A.M.) the field-gun barrage came down on a
line about 300 yards in front of No. 3 Company, creeping forward at
the rate of 100 yards every two minutes. As soon as our troops moved
off from their forming-up positions to close up to the barrage, the
enemy covered his front with a deadly and accurate screen of bullets,
fired from numerous carefully-sighted machine-guns, which were so well
protected that our field-gun barrage had little or no effect upon them.
In consequence we suffered heavy casualties from the very outset. On
the left the troops of the leading company were mown down as soon as
they got on to their feet, and were unable to advance. The right of the
2nd Battalion Coldstream Guards had also suffered severely, and was
unable to push forward.

As No. 2 Company, under Captain O. Martin Smith, debouched from Hally
Copse, it was caught by the machine-gun fire, and nearly cut to pieces
before it could extend from artillery formation. Captain O. Martin
Smith made a determined effort to reinforce the left of No. 3 Company,
and push forward the advance, but long before his Company reached the
front troops it had suffered over 50 per cent casualties. Captain O.
Martin Smith and Lieutenant de Lisle were wounded, and Lieutenant
Gwyer, who was pluckily pushing forward in spite of the storm of
bullets, was killed. Captain O. Martin Smith ordered his Company to
lie down in the open, while the N.C.O.'s collected the men who were
nearest to them, and eventually got in close support of No. 3 Company.
As, however, the enemy was entrenched on the top of the rise, 200 yards
in front, the slightest movement attracted a torrent of lead. This
made it impossible to get communication in any direction or to collect
the wounded, who had to remain in the open on the fire-swept ground
until dark. Lieutenant R. M. Oliver, who had been in charge of the left
platoon of No. 3 Company, had been killed earlier, so the left half of
the Battalion was now without an officer.

In the centre, during the first 200 yards, the machine-gun fire,
although equally intense, was slightly less accurate; but on nearing
the St. Leger--Homme Mort road Captain Cornforth found it swept by a
practically impassable hail of machine-gun bullets, fired from three
directions--the Homme Mort on the south, Bank's Trench on the east, and
outskirts of St. Leger on the north. This last enemy position was off
the Battalion frontage, and the troops opposite it had been held up.
The only method of relieving this pressure on the left was to push on
at all costs in our centre and right.

Lieut.-Colonel Rasch sent up No. 1 Company to reinforce the thinned
ranks of No. 3, and to help in the capture of Homme Mort and the
rushing of Bank's Trench. While going up this Company came under heavy
fire, and Lieutenant Jesper and Lieutenant Giles were both wounded.
Captain Cornforth therefore took over command of this Company in
addition to his own.

With these reinforcements Lieutenant White and Second Lieutenant
Langley led their platoons forward against the machine-gun nest at
Homme Mort, but in advancing up the slope they were met with an
increasing volume of accurate fire, and both the officers were mortally
wounded before the position was reached. These platoons, however, with
an inspired dash and determination took the position after a hard
fight. Twenty prisoners were captured, in spite of the fact that, in
the short rush up to the position, these platoons had been practically
decimated.

At the same time Captain Cornforth decided to rush Bank's Trench,
although the road was still swept by enfilade fire from the left,
and by frontal fire from the trench itself. A party of men was sent
over the road to cover the advance, but few succeeded in crossing it.
Captain Cornforth thereupon collected a small number of men, led them
across the road, and by short rushes succeeded with three other men in
gaining Bank's Trench. Here fortunately they found a large supply of
German hand-grenades, which they quickly detonated, and by this means
succeeded in clearing the trench for 500 yards northwards, knocking
out six German machine-guns and taking 40 men prisoners. Several other
men soon succeeded in joining them, and this party, which eventually
numbered one officer and 25 men, found that they were completely
isolated. No other troops could be located on their flanks, and the
ground was being swept by machine-gun fire from Bank's Copse in the
front, from the high ground on the right, and from the outskirts of St.
Leger on the left. It was impossible to advance farther, and the rest
of the day was spent in resisting the efforts of the Germans to turn
them out, and in endeavouring to gain communication on the flanks.

Lieutenant Morgan with No. 4 Company was more successful. At zero he
advanced along Mory Switch and the southern end of Bank's Trench,
eventually establishing a position in Vraucourt Trench. The lie of the
land and the cover afforded by the trenches enabled this Company to
keep up with the barrage, and to avoid coming under the intense fire
that the remainder of the Battalion had experienced. During the advance
this Company captured a German Battalion Commander and 180 men--a
remarkably fine performance. Lieutenant Morgan led his Company forward
with such dash that they succeeded in penetrating the enemy's position
to a depth of 2000 yards. However, it was soon clear that they were
completely isolated, as they were being fired at from all directions.
When it was dark Lieutenant Morgan decided that it would be unwise to
remain in such an advanced position, since neither the Sixty-second
Division on his right nor our own troops on his left showed any signs
of coming into line with him, and he consequently withdrew his Company
until he was in touch with troops on his flanks.

[Sidenote: Aug. 28.]

During the night the enemy retired from our front, and in the morning
the remnants of the Battalion were reorganised, and continued the
advance over the original frontage for about 1700 yards to a marked-out
trench called Bank's Reserve. Here some machine-guns were encountered,
but a good and continuous line was established with connection on both
flanks.

This line was handed over to the 1st Battalion Gordon Highlanders
on the night of the 28th-29th, and the Battalion marched back to
the trenches east of Hamelincourt. The only officers left with the
Battalion were Lieut.-Colonel Rasch, Captain Cornforth, Captain
Briscoe, and Lieutenant Morgan. The total casualties were 12 officers
and 278 other ranks. Amongst the officers the casualties were as
follows:

    Lieut. G. F. Lawrence                Killed.
    Lieut. R. M. Oliver                     "
    Lieut. C. Gwyer                         "
    Lieut. H. White                         "
    2nd Lieut. F. J. Langley                "
    2nd Lieut. H. A. Finch                  "
    Lieut. M. H. Ponsonby                Died of wounds.
    Capt. O. Martin Smith                Wounded.
    Lieut. N. McK. Jesper                   "
    Lieut. C. C. T. Giles                   "
    2nd Lieut. J. A. Paton                  "
    2nd Lieut. A. P. J. M. P. de Lisle      "

In a message, which Major-General Feilding afterwards sent to
Brigadier-General de Crespigny, he said: "All Battalions of the 1st
Guards Brigade discharged their duty splendidly. The attack delivered
by the 2nd Battalion Grenadier Guards and 2nd Battalion Coldstream
Guards on August 27 not only inflicted heavy losses on the enemy and
brought in large numbers of prisoners, but also compelled him next day
to relax his hold on the high ground south of Croisilles."


                           THE 3RD BATTALION

                           ROLL OF OFFICERS

    Lieut.-Colonel A. F. A. N. Thorne, D.S.O.     Commanding Officer.
    Major Viscount Lascelles, D.S.O.              Second in Command.
    Capt. the Hon. A. G. Agar-Robartes, M.C.      Adjutant.
    Lieut. E. G. A. Fitzgerald, D.S.O.            Assistant Adjutant.
    Lieut. E. N. de Geijer                        Intelligence Officer.
    Capt. F. J. Heasman, M.C.                     Transport Officer.
    Capt. G. H. Wall                              Quartermaster.
    Capt. A. F. R. Wiggins                        No. 1 Company.
    Lieut. G. M. Cornish, M.C.                       "     "
    Lieut. A. G. Elliott                             "     "
    2nd Lieut. E. L. F. Clough-Taylor                "     "
    2nd Lieut. R. Delacombe                          "     "
    Capt. G. A. I. Dury, M.C.                     No. 2 Company.
    Lieut. C. C. Carstairs, M.C.                     "     "
    Lieut. A. H. S. Adair                            "     "
    2nd Lieut. W. B. L. Manley                       "     "
    2nd Lieut. G. R. Gunther                         "     "
    2nd Lieut. J. Chapman                            "     "
    2nd Lieut. R. K. Henderson                       "     "
    Capt. N. C. Tufnell                           No. 3 Company.
    Lieut. E. R. M. Fryer, M.C.                      "     "
    Lieut. C. C. Brown                               "     "
    Lieut. G. W. Godman                              "     "
    2nd Lieut. H. J. Gibbon                          "     "
    2nd Lieut. A. D. Cooper                          "     "
    Capt. G. F. R. Hirst                          No. 4 Company.
    Lieut. C. H. Bedford                             "     "
    Lieut. R. G. West                                "     "
    2nd Lieut. E. J. Bunbury                         "     "
    2nd Lieut. R. P. Papillon                        "     "
    2nd Lieut. R. C. G. de Reuter                    "     "
    Capt. R. Anderson, R.A.M.C.                   Medical Officer.
    Capt. the Rev. S. Phillimore, M.C.            Chaplain.

[Sidenote: July.]

The first week in July was spent by the 3rd Battalion at Labazeque,
and on the 7th it proceeded to Ransart, where it relieved the 10th
Battalion Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders in the right sector of the
front occupied by the Guards Division.

Two companies were placed in the front line with one company in support
and one in reserve, and officers' patrols were sent out every night
from dusk to dawn, but there was no movement on the part of the enemy.
On the 10th the Battalion moved back into support, and on the 15th into
Divisional Reserve, where it remained for three days. From the 19th to
the 24th the Battalion went up again into the front trenches, where
the work consisted of improving the line by laying down duckboards and
digging sumps and latrines. Fifteen officers, 30 sergeants, and 55
corporals from the American Army were attached to the Battalion, and
were distributed between the four companies and Battalion Headquarters.
Lieutenant S. G. Fairbairn, Second Lieutenant H. P. Gordon, and
Second Lieutenant S. Calvocoressi arrived during this tour of duty
in the trenches, and on the 25th the Battalion retired into support,
where more officers and men of the American Army were attached for
instruction. On the 30th the Battalion moved back into Divisional
Reserve.

[Sidenote: Aug.]

After four days in reserve the Battalion went up into the front line
near Adinfer, where it remained for a week carrying out inter-company
relief. In this part of the line patrols were sent out every night,
and a company from the 320th Regiment of the United States Army,
which accompanied the Battalion, supplied a certain number of men for
this purpose. On the 6th Second Lieutenant R. P. Papillon when out
on patrol duty, encountered a German patrol in Observation Trench,
and after severely wounding one of the enemy, succeeded in bringing
back an identification mark. The Higher Command, however, required
further information, and accordingly a special patrol was sent out on
the night of the 10th. Captain Churchill, whose great experience in
all kinds of incursions into the enemy's line rendered him eminently
fitted for the task, was sent from the Brigade Headquarters, to take
charge of the party, which consisted of Second Lieutenant de Reuter
and seven men. A covering-party composed of thirteen men, under the
command of Sergeant Birtles, accompanied the raiders. Hardly had the
patrol started, when a shell fell among them, wounding one man, who
had to be carried back to the trenches. Following the German outpost
line, which consisted of small adjacent rifle-pits, but which showed
no sign of frequent occupation, the patrol came on the German wire.
This formidable obstacle consisted of barbed wire in concertina
shape, staked to the ground, with strands running through it. After
a careful search a gap was found, and through this the patrol went.
After following the track for about forty yards a German sentry was
seen. The patrol stood still, and the sentry walked away unconscious of
its presence. Soon afterwards some more of the enemy were seen moving
round to the left of the track. They were evidently suspicious, as
they only whispered. Three of them came crawling slowly towards the
patrol. In dead silence the patrol waited, but the Germans turned back,
and apparently reported all clear, for thirty to forty more Germans
appeared, and stood up close together. They came to within thirty
yards of the patrol, when Lieutenant de Reuter gave the order "rapid
fire." Several of them were seen to fall. It was now merely a question
whether the Germans would attempt to capture the patrol or not, but
they contented themselves with firing and throwing a few bombs,
while Véry lights were sent up. Captain Churchill therefore retired
unmolested through the wire, having only had one man wounded.

On the 10th Second Lieutenant de Geijer and twenty other ranks raided a
German post under an artillery barrage. At 3.15 A.M. a Stokes
mortar barrage supplemented the artillery bombardment, and the raiding
party in two groups, under Second Lieutenant de Geijer and Sergeant
Butler respectively, rushed the enemy's post. The Germans had, however,
abandoned the post just before the raid took place, and the last
two were seen to run from it, as the raiders started. Much valuable
information was gained, as the Germans left everything behind, but,
with the exception of Lieutenant de Geijer who was slightly wounded,
there were no casualties.

On the 11th the Battalion was relieved by the 1st Battalion Coldstream,
and went into support, moving on four days later to billets in Saulty,
where it remained until the 20th.

On the 20th the Battalion "debussed" between Blaireville and
Heudecourt, and took up its assembly positions east and south-east of
Boiry.

The orders General Sergison-Brooke received were to attack Moyenneville
in conjunction with the Second and Third Divisions on the right. In
the operation orders which he issued the capture of the first two
objectives was to be carried out by the 1st Battalion Scots Guards on
the right, and by the 1st Battalion Coldstream on the left. The 3rd
Battalion Grenadiers was then to pass through, and secure the third
objective. Eight tanks would co-operate in front of each Battalion.

The following officers of the 3rd Battalion took part in these
operations:

    Lieut.-Colonel A. F. A. N. Thorne, D.S.O.      Commanding Officer.
    Lieut. E. N. de Geijer                         Intelligence Officer.
    Capt. E. R. M. Fryer, M.C.                     No. 1 Company.
    Lieut. C. C. Carstairs, M.C.                     "      "
    Lieut. R. Delacombe                              "      "
    2nd Lieut. E. L. F. Clough-Taylor                "      "
    Lieut. A. H. S. Adair                          No. 2 Company.
    Lieut. S. G. Fairbairn                           "      "
    Lieut. J. Chapman                                "      "
    Capt. N. C. Tufnell                            No. 3 Company.
    Lieut. C. Clifton Brown                          "      "
    2nd Lieut. A. D. Cooper                          "      "
    Capt. G. F. R. Hirst                           No. 4 Company.
    Lieut. R. G. West                                "      "
    2nd Lieut. R. C. G. de Reuter                    "      "
    2nd Lieut. R. P. Papillon                        "      "
    Lieut. Graff, U.S.A.M.O.R.C.                   Medical Officer.
    Capt. the Rev. S. Phillimore, M.C.             Chaplain.

[Sidenote: Aug. 21.]

There was a thick mist in the morning, so thick that it was impossible
to see more than a few yards ahead. On the one hand this favoured the
attackers; on the other there was always the risk of the Battalion
losing its way and never reaching the enemy's lines. In spite of
everything, however, the leading Battalions eventually succeeded in
securing the first two objectives.

The 3rd Battalion had breakfasted, water-bottles had been refilled,
and the companies were beginning to get ready for the advance, when
this blanket of fog came down. At zero hour, 4.53 A.M., the
barrage opened up and the attack began. Captain Smith, who commanded
C Company 15th Battalion Tank Corps (Mark V. Star Tanks), arrived at
Battalion Headquarters, and reported that his tanks had been delayed
by gas in Coseul Valley, so that they would not be able to advance
with the Battalion as arranged, but that they would endeavour to
overtake it on the second objective. The Battalion started off with
No. 3 Company under Captain Tufnell on the right, No. 4 under Captain
Hirst on the left, No. 2 under Lieutenant Adair in support, and No. 1
under Captain Fryer in reserve. The fog was as thick as ever, and the
smoke shells in the barrage increased its density. Keeping direction by
compass was tedious and difficult, since it necessitated the removal
of the steel helmet and box respirator, and even then it was far from
accurate. To add to the difficulties, there were several pockets of
German machine-gunners, which had been missed by the 1st Battalion
Scots Guards in their advance, and which suddenly loomed out in the
mist often in rear of the Battalion as it advanced. No. 12 Platoon
captured two machine-gun posts in the first objective, and the markers
under Lieutenant de Geijer, the Intelligence Officer, found German
machine-gunners still holding out to the west of the second objective,
in the area where the Battalion should have formed up. The 1st
Battalion Scots Guards had captured the right and left of the second
objective, but owing to the fog the centre was still in the hands of
the Germans.

The 1st Battalion Scots Guards, on finding out what had happened, soon
cleared out these Germans with the aid of No. 1 Company (the Reserve
Company).

By 6 A.M. the Battalion Headquarters had reached its destination,
namely, the two trees between the first and second objectives, but
was unable to get in touch with any of the companies. Tanks were
moving about in the fog, and the Lewis guns were engaging the German
machine-guns at close quarters, and were firing indiscriminately into
the fog. To give an example of how confusing the situation was, the
Battalion Headquarters was charged from the front by two platoons of
the Scots Guards, who mistook it in the fog for a German machine-gun
post.

By 7.30 No. 2 Company, under Lieutenant Adair, had gone through
the junction of the 1st Battalion Scots Guards and 1st Battalion
Coldstream, and was advancing on its objective, which was the valley
between the railway and Moyenneville. A little later Captain Tufnell
and Captain Hirst reported that Nos. 9 and 12 Platoons of No. 3 Company
and all No. 4 Company were near Moyblain Trench, having completely lost
their way. No. 11 Platoon had also lost its bearings, and after moving
round in a semicircle, was discovered heading towards the rear instead
of towards the front.

Meanwhile, Lieutenant Duff Cooper, with No. 10 Platoon, having
entirely lost touch with the remainder of the company, had wandered
too far to the south, and after pushing on in what he thought was the
right direction for three hours, found himself in the outskirts of
Courcelles. There he met a platoon of the 7th Battalion K.S.L.I., which
had also lost its way, and, knowing that the Halte on the railway was
the eventual objective, he determined to make for it. Together these
two platoons started off, and as they were clearing the dug-outs on the
road, they fell in with a tank which suddenly appeared out of the fog.
With its assistance they attacked and captured the railway on each side
of the Halte, where a German aid-post was placed. There is no doubt
that these two isolated platoons were the only units that succeeded in
reaching the third objective for some hours, on the whole front of the
two Northern Divisions.

When Lieut.-Colonel Thorne received a message from Lieutenant Duff
Cooper, saying that the Halte had been taken, he sent up No. 1 Company
under Captain Fryer to the assistance of this isolated platoon, and in
order to save time directed No. 2 Company to advance on the objective
originally assigned to No. 4. Lieutenant Forbes with two machine-guns
was sent up to co-operate with No. 1 Company, and Lieutenant Hulme with
two more to assist No. 2 Company. No barrage could be arranged for this
attack, and it was impossible to obtain any assistance from the tanks,
which were now returning to their rallying positions, since they were
all suffering from engine trouble or the lack of petrol.

At 10 A.M. the fog began to lift, but Captain Fryer had by
this time brought up Nos. 1 and 2 Platoons to the assistance of No. 10
Platoon. Captain Fryer and Lieutenant Duff Cooper made a most valuable
reconnaissance of the railway north of the Halte under heavy fire,
and on returning decided at once to attack the German posts they had
discovered. No. 10 Platoon started off, and supported by Nos. 1 and 2
Platoons succeeded in capturing the whole of the objectives allotted
to No. 3 Company. This attack was carried out with great dash, but
Lieutenant Delacombe and Second Lieutenant Clough-Taylor were wounded.

Nos. 7 and 8 Platoons of No. 2 Company had in the meantime commenced
their advance on the railway cutting, but soon found that they were
exposed to heavy enfilade fire from the railway north of the Halte.
They made but little headway at first, but, when the attack of No. 10
Platoon lifted the enemy's fire off them, they pushed forward, and
rushed the railway and hollow ground to the east of it, capturing 5
machine-guns and 60 prisoners, and gaining touch with the 1st Battalion
Coldstream Guards on the left and No. 1 Company on the right.

No. 3 Company now moved up into support of No. 1, and four machine-guns
were placed in Magazine Trench as barrage guns. No. 6 Platoon made a
farther advance, and seized the hollow east of the railway and west of
Hameau North, where 10 machine-guns and 60 prisoners were captured.
Nos. 3 and 8 Platoons advanced to the east of the railway, and
completed the capture of the whole objective allotted to the Battalion.
Although twelve hours behind the scheduled time, Lieut.-Colonel Thorne
was able to report that the task of the Battalion had been successfully
carried out.

The leading of No. 10 Platoon and Nos. 1 and 2 Companies was
particularly fine, and the response made by the men was beyond all
praise. The fact that in spite of the fog each platoon managed to
get to its own place was entirely due to the persistence with which
Platoon Commanders advanced whenever opportunity offered, and to the
determination on the part of the men to reach the enemy. After the fog
lifted the attack was carried out steadily and relentlessly across
ground swept by shell-fire and machine-guns, and succeeded in spite of
the lack of an artillery barrage or tanks.

After dark, ammunition, water and rations were sent up by pack animals,
and all the platoons rejoined their companies. Reconnoitring patrols
under Lieutenant Clifton Brown and Lieutenant West were sent out to
locate the new German line, and discovered that the enemy was holding
the line of the sunken road about half a mile east of the railway. The
Germans were apparently in some strength, and very much on the look-out.

  [Illustration:

    _Photographed by the Mendoza Galleries     Emery Walker ph. sc._

  _Brigadier-General B. N. Sergison-Brooke D.S.O._
  ]

[Sidenote: Aug. 22.]

The next morning a heavy hostile barrage came down on the whole
position occupied by the Battalion, and the outposts could see the
enemy advancing in three waves. The S.O.S. signal at once went up.
Immediately our artillery put down a magnificent and accurate barrage,
and the companies in front opened a concentrated fire with Lewis guns
and rifles on the advancing enemy. The German counter-attack stood
no chance at all, and completely crumbled away; only in one place did
the Germans succeed in gaining a footing, and that was on the right,
where they captured a trench. When the attack utterly failed, this
party of Germans had to withdraw with heavy loss.

The following German orders that were subsequently taken from a
prisoner give the details of this counter-attack. It will be seen that
they advanced in some strength, and it is all the more remarkable that
this carefully planned attack should have been repulsed by only two
companies of the 3rd Battalion.


                   CAPTURED GERMAN DIVISIONAL ORDER

    234 Div.                                       Div. H.Q.,
    Abt. la. 2802.                                 21-8-18.


                           DIVISIONAL ORDER

   1. According to information received from the Army we have
   repulsed 4½ English Divisions to-day. The enemy has been beaten
   and he knows it.

   The enemy has reached the Achiet le Grand Boisleux Railway.
   New artillery positions have been located, large enemy
   concentrations and movement observed.

   2. XVIII. Corps will retake the old main line of resistance.

   For this operation the 234 Div.--under the orders of the 40th
   Div.--will attack with the 2nd Guards Res. Div.--under the
   orders of the 6th Bav. Res. Div.--on its left.

   3. The infantry will be divided into three attacking groups
   under the command of Col. Reichart (Comdr. 88 Inf. Bde.).

    _Right attacking group._      Major v. Kluefer.

                     181 I.R.
                     3rd Bn. 452 I.R.
                     3 Batteries, 32 F.A.R.
                     Res. Pion. Coy. 55.

    _Centre attacking group._      Major v. Pape.

                     104 I.R.
                     451 I.R. less 2nd Bn.
                     3 Batteries 32 F.A.R.
                     3 Coy. Pion. Bn. 22.

    _Left attacking group._      Capt. Heine.

                     1st and 3rd Bns. 453 I.R.
                     2nd Bn. 452 I.R.
                     359 Pion. Coy.
                     360 Pion. Coy.

    Objective:--             Moyenneville--Aerodrome ridge.

   4. The 21st Res. Div. will detail one Bn. to support the
   attack on Moyenneville. 88 Inf. Bde. will establish liaison
   with this Bn. Zero hour on the whole front of attack will be
   5.45 A.M. (German time).

   5. 134 I.R. with three Batteries F.A.R. 32 as Divisional
   Reserve will be held in readiness N.E. of Mory.

   6. Col. v. Bibra (Comdr. 234 Inf. Bde.) with the battalions
   formerly in support (1st Bn. 452 I.R., 3rd Bn. 451 I.R., 2nd
   Bn. 453 I.R.) will hold the artillery defensive position.
   These Battalions will remain as "safety garrison" and
   will hold the line at all costs in the event of a hostile
   counter-attack.

   7. Duties of the Artillery:

     _X-15 to X._ Burst of fire on the enemy front line on the
       Railway embankment.

     _X._ Heavy bombardment on Moyenneville and Courcelles. Lift on
       to the line Eastern outskirts Moyenneville Eastern outskirts
       Courcelles, continue heavy bombardment on Moyenneville and
       Courcelles.

     _X plus 20._ Lift to the line _Eastern_ outskirts
       Moyenneville--_Western_ outskirts of Courcelles.

     _X plus 40._ Lift to the line W. of the
       Moyenneville--Ablainzeville Road.

     _X plus 60._ Lift to the trench which extends from
       Moyenneville across Aerodrome ridge towards the S. (former
       main line of resistance).

     X " 5.45 A.M.
     Three Batteries F.A.R. 501 and Foot Art. Bn. 401 have occupied
     positions E. of Ervillers.

   11. Div. H. Q.... Queant.

                                                   V. STUMPFF,
                                                 G.O.C., 234 Div.




                            CHAPTER XXXIII

                               SEPTEMBER

                          _Diary of the War_


[Sidenote: Sept. 1918.]

The German retreat still continued, and the Allies gained ground all
along the line. The salient at St. Mihiel was carried by the American
Army, and the Hindenburg line was captured by the British. A combined
attack of the British and Belgian troops under the command of King
Albert succeeded beyond all expectation, and the British Fleet was
able to join in and bombard the coast. An Austrian offer to enter into
Peace negotiations was published, and at the same time the Germans made
overtures to the Belgians, but the Allied conference at Versailles
refused even to consider either of these proposals.

In Macedonia the Allied Forces inflicted a defeat on the Bulgarians,
who retreated on a front of nearly 100 miles, and on September 25 the
Bulgarian Government applied for an unconditional armistice.

In Palestine General Allenby commenced a series of attacks on the Turks
between Rafat and the sea, and on the 30th Damascus was taken.


                          DIVISIONAL ACCOUNT

During September Marshal Foch followed up his successes all along the
line, and the Germans were forced to abandon position after position.
Ludendorff, however, always imagined that the Siegfried line was
impregnable, and that if the German Army succeeded in getting back
there intact, there was no reason why this position should not be held
during the winter.

To the British Army was assigned the difficult task of piercing this
impregnable line and rendering it untenable, but many doubts were
expressed as to whether this was feasible. Sir Douglas Haig, however,
was convinced that it could be done, and directed the First and Third
Armies to open the attack in the direction of Cambrai, in the hopes
that after they had advanced it would be possible for the Fourth Army
to pierce the strongest part of the line farther south.

After the operations at the end of August the Guards Division had only
five days' rest before it was again put into the line. On September
2 the Canadian Corps had broken the Drocourt--Queant Switch, whilst
on the Sixth Corps front the Third Division had, after very heavy
fighting, made ground in the neighbourhood of Noreuil and Lagnicourt.
The Guards Division moved up from the Ransart area, and was ordered to
continue the attack the following day. The position of the advanced
troops of the Third Division was so uncertain that it was decided to
form up for the attack, along the railway line just east of Noreuil,
some distance in rear of the line which the Third Division claimed to
have reached, the troops of this Division being then withdrawn. This
necessitated the sacrifice of a certain amount of ground won by the
Third Division at a heavy cost, but it ensured a straight jumping-off
line, and enormously simplified the task of the artillery. (This
procedure was repeated on October 9, and on each occasion was fully
justified by results.)

After a long and tiring march from their rest areas, Sergison-Brooke's
and Follett's Brigades formed up on the right and left respectively,
with De Crespigny's Brigade in reserve south of St. Leger. The attack
started under a very good barrage at 5.20 A.M. Reports soon
showed that the enemy had withdrawn during the night, and the advance
continued without opposition until the old British front line, just
short of the Hindenburg line, was reached. By this time the troops were
utterly exhausted, having covered since noon the previous day some
twenty miles, in full fighting kit and over hilly country.

During the course of the advance a number of prisoners and guns were
captured, but the most noticeable feature on the ground which was
recovered was the enormous number of the enemy's dead horses which
littered and often blocked the roads: eloquent testimony of the work of
our aeroplanes and long-range guns, but entailing heavy and unpleasant
fatigue work for our tired troops.

On September 4 Follett's Brigade was ordered to push forward, and form
an advance-guard for the rest of the Division, but it found that the
Germans were holding the Hindenburg line in some force. This prevented
any ground being gained, and the line soon stabilised along the Army
front.

The principal features of the operations that took place between
September 5 and 26 were:

(_a_) Some fine trench fighting, by which the 1st Battalion Grenadier
Guards, under the command of Lieut.-Colonel Lord Gort, reached the line
of the Canal du Nord.

(_b_) The heavy and continuous fighting for the village of Mœuvres
farther north, during which it changed hands several times before being
finally captured and held by the Fifty-second Division.

(_c_) The heavy gas-shelling, with which the Germans searched all
possible assembly positions every night in evident fear of an attack,
and which, but for the improved gas discipline, would have caused heavy
casualties.

During this period the troops had the satisfaction of seeing two huge
German bombing 'planes brought down in flames, on successive nights by
our night-flying scouts, working in conjunction with the reorganised
searchlight system.

On September 11 Major-General Feilding left to take command of the
London District on the retirement of Lieut.-General Sir Francis Lloyd,
who had held that command with conspicuous success during the war. For
four years Sir Francis Lloyd had occupied one of the most responsible
and difficult positions in the Army, and had dealt, especially in
the initial stages of the war, with innumerable problems requiring
consummate skill, judgment, and tact.

There were several generals who were eligible to succeed Major-General
Feilding in command of the Guards Division; all of them had fought
consistently for four years, and had been proved and tempered in
the furnace of war. The choice of the Commander-in-Chief fell upon
Major-General T. G. Matheson, C.B., an officer of exceptional ability,
who was reputed to be one of the best Divisional Commanders in the
British Army.

On September 25 the orders for the forthcoming attacks were issued.
The Guards Division was to attack and capture the ridge running east
from Flesquières to Premy Chapel. On the right the Third Division would
attack and capture the village of Flesquières, and on the left the
Fifty-second Division would capture the Hindenburg line west of the
Canal du Nord, after which the Sixty-third Division would pass through,
and swinging right-handed would take the Hindenburg support line and
the villages of Graincourt and Anneux. In the event of this operation
being completely successful, further objectives were given, including
Marcoing for the Third Division, Nine Wood and the outskirts of
Noyelles for the Guards Division, Cantaing and Fontaine-Notre-Dame for
the Fifty-seventh Division, which was to pass through the Sixty-third
Division. The Sixty-second and Second Divisions were to be prepared
to pass through the Third and Guards Divisions respectively, and
capture Rumilly and the high ground east of the Canal de l'Escaut. In
the Guards Division Sergison-Brooke's Brigade was to take the first
objective (the Hindenburg support line) and form a defensive flank to
the left during the next advance, until Graincourt had been secured by
the Fifty-second and Sixty-third Divisions.

De Crespigny's Brigade would then pass through and capture the
trench-system north-west, north, and north-east of Flesquières, moving
on afterwards to the spur running from Flesquières to Cantaing with a
view to capturing the batteries in that area and turning the Graincourt
line. This advance was to synchronise with the attack by Follett's
Brigade, but was not to be pressed against strong resistance.

Follett's Brigade was to pass through De Crespigny's Brigade, and to
capture the third objective, including the high ground round Premy
Chapel. Detailed orders for a farther advance were given in the event
of no great resistance being encountered.

The attack would be supported by six brigades R.H.A., heavy artillery,
and three machine-gun companies.

The assembly was rendered unusually difficult by reason of the
exceptionally large number of troops that had to be accommodated, by
the necessity of avoiding gas areas, and by the extreme darkness of the
night. The 1st Battalion Scots Guards also suffered from a barrage,
which the enemy put down on their assembly trench just before zero. The
attack started at 5.20 A.M., and at once met with a check on the left,
where the 1st Battalion Coldstream was held up by a machine-gun hidden
under a fallen bridge. By the time this obstacle had been overcome the
barrage was lost, and this Battalion suffered heavy casualties before
reaching its objective, particularly near Mammoth cross-roads, but the
remainder of the Brigade reached the first objective with very slight
loss.

The advance to the second objective was a very difficult operation. It
was known that the Sixty-third Division could not reach Graincourt from
the north for another two hours, and General de Crespigny had therefore
to hold back his left, and push forward along Shingler Trench with his
right. In the meantime Graincourt and the trenches south of it were
kept under heavy artillery and machine-gun fire, in order to prevent,
as far as possible, the Germans enfilading the troops advancing farther
south. Flesquières was captured in conjunction with the Third Division,
but the beetroot factory to the east of it held out, so that it was
impossible for Follett's Brigade to get through in time to follow their
barrage.

The Fifty-second and Sixty-third Divisions on the left had been held
up, which prevented De Crespigny's Brigade from advancing, and the left
flank of the Guards Division was therefore very much extended, and
exposed to cross fire from the left. General Follett, who had come up
with General de Crespigny to see how the battle developed, before his
Brigade came into action, was killed by this cross fire. His death was
mourned by the whole Division, for there was no braver man in the Army,
and indeed it was a serious loss to his Brigade just as it was going
into action. Major-General Matheson sent orders that Lieut.-Colonel
Lord Gort was to take command of the Brigade, but that pending his
arrival General de Crespigny was to command both Brigades.

At this stage the battle might easily have died down, as the time-table
was out of gear; the attack on the left had apparently failed, and
the Germans in Graincourt village and Graincourt line were giving a
great deal of trouble with their cross fire. Fortunately, however,
a Commander of great enterprise and determination in Lord Gort was
in the line, and before long the 1st Battalion Grenadiers, supported
by the 1st Battalion Welsh Guards, had pushed out along the ridge
east of Flesquières, and established itself only just short of Premy
Chapel, while the 2nd Battalion Scots Guards, together with units of De
Crespigny's Brigade, formed a defensive flank along Shingler and Silver
Trenches.

Not long after, the Sixty-third Division, having organised a new
attack, pushed down the Hindenburg support line, and the Germans began
to pour out of Graincourt; as they streamed away, horse, foot, and gun,
towards Cantaing, they were caught in flank by rifle, machine-gun, and
artillery fire from the Guards Division, and suffered heavily. The 2nd
Battalion Grenadiers at once pushed forward and captured Orival Wood,
taking some guns, and driving the remaining batteries away.

The Second Division was ordered to pass through and pursue the
retreating enemy, but dusk fell before it reached the front line, and
all it could do was to take over the line occupied by the advanced
troops of the Guards Division, which was withdrawn during the night to
the area east and west of the Canal du Nord.

On September 27 the casualties in the Guards Division were 40 officers
and 1200 other ranks. The total number of prisoners taken by the
Division was 25 officers and 703 other ranks, in addition to 10
field-guns.


                           THE 1ST BATTALION

[Sidenote: 1st Batt.]

On September 2 the Battalion proceeded to the area about Homme Mort,
and halted for dinner near Moyenneville. In the afternoon the whole
Brigade concentrated in Maida Vale, and Lord Gort rode forward with the
Company Commanders towards Longatte, in view of an attack the following
day. The orders for the attack were issued that night, and early the
next morning the Battalion proceeded to Noreuil, where they went into
old German dug-outs. The Germans had retired to the Hindenburg line,
and a general advance on Bourlon and Mœuvres was ordered (on the
whole Corps front). The 1st Battalion marched to a position west of
Lagnicourt, where they remained for the night. A farther advance was
made the next day, and on the 5th it reached Louverval Wood, where a
week was spent training and practising open warfare.

On the 11th the Battalion moved up into the front line, but the relief
was only effected by the infiltration of the companies through troops
of the 50th Infantry Brigade. This Brigade, having made an attack
that evening, had failed to secure its objective, and the relief was
consequently not an easy one. Lord Gort and Captain Simpson spent the
night reconnoitring the trenches in the outer zone of the Hindenburg
line, in constant danger of being caught by the Germans, and the
information they gained enabled the Battalion to establish itself by
dawn the next morning in the objective, which the 5th Infantry Brigade
had intended to secure the night before. At dawn a bombing attack
was made up Brown Trench, and the line of Alban Avenue was secured.
A barrage, supporting the attack on Havrincourt, was put down on the
whole front, and soon brought retaliation from the enemy. Near the
sunken trench in Alban Avenue a shell burst, killing Lieutenant E. B.
Shelley, and wounding Second Lieutenant Payne severely and Captain
Simpson slightly. In addition to the shelling, the enemy's machine-guns
were very active, enfilading Alban Avenue. In the afternoon the 225th
German Infantry Regiment carried out a bombing attack on Beatty and
Babs posts, but was repulsed with several killed and wounded, leaving
two machine-guns in our hands. Throughout the day the enemy maintained
a heavy harassing fire, and in the evening again attempted a bombing
attack on Beatty and Babs posts, but with the same result. The
following day the shelling decreased considerably, and inter-company
relief was carried out. First Lieutenant W. B. Evans, U.S.A.M.O.R.C.,
and Captain the Rev. J. O. Venables, in addition to 27 other ranks,
were gassed on the 13th, and every day there were a number of men
killed, wounded, and gassed.

On the 15th the following letter from Brigadier-General W. S. Osborn,
5th Infantry Brigade, was received by Brigadier-General Follett:

   The 5th Infantry Brigade much appreciates the support given
   them on their left by the 1st Batt. Grenadier Guards in
   Beatty Post and Alban Trench. The counter-attack repulsed
   by Grenadier Guardsmen would have fallen on their weakened
   Companies. A captured map showed the Hun main line running
   down Hunt Avenue with outposts in Slag Avenue, and the
   counter-attack was evidently made to gain this resistance
   line. Will you please thank Colonel Lord Gort from me on
   behalf of the 5th I.B.

The week preceding the attack on Premy Chapel was uneventful, and
on the 25th Major-General Matheson explained the details of the
operations. Captain Lawford was appointed to the Staff of the Fourth
Army, and Captain Lovell, M.C., took over the duties of Adjutant.

  [Illustration:

  _Attack on Premy Chapel_

  _September 27th. 1918_

  _Emery Walker Ltd._
  ]


                     _The Attack on Premy Chapel_

[Sidenote: Sept. 26.]

On the evening of the 26th the Battalion left its billets about a mile
north-west of the village of Lagnicourt, and marched with its full
battle equipment, accompanied by Lewis guns, limbers, field-kitchens,
and water-carts, along the Lagnicourt--Doignies road, to its bivouacs
about 1500 yards west of Louverval Wood. The strength of the Battalion
was 15 officers and 395 other ranks actually going into action.

The officers who took part in the attack were:

    Lieut.-Colonel Viscount Gort, D.S.O.,
      M.V.O., M.C.                              Commanding Officer.
    Capt. W. H. Lovell, M.C.                    Adjutant.
    2nd Lieut. J. C. Blunt                      Intelligence Officer.
    Lieut. A. M. Brown                          King's Company.
    Lieut. C. G. Kennaway                         "     "
    Capt. J. S. Carter                          No. 2 Company.
    Lieut. A. A. Morris                           "     "
    Lieut. L. C. Jesper                           "     "
    Capt. J. H. C. Simpson                      No. 3 Company.
    2nd Lieut. L. F. A. d'Erlanger                "     "
    2nd Lieut. G. S. Lamont                       "     "
    Lieut. B. H. Jones                          No. 4 Company.
    2nd Lieut. D. H. Clarke                       "     "
    2nd Lieut. A. Grant                           "     "
    Capt. W. Lindsay, R.A.M.C.                  Medical Officer.
    Capt. the Rev. C. Venables                  Chaplain.

Lieut. R. W. F. Echlin was acting Brigade Transport Officer, and Lieut.
R. G. Buchanan as Quartermaster.

Lord Gort issued the following operation orders:

   The Battalion will attack Premy Chapel hill tomorrow the
   27th, with the object of securing the line of the sunken road.

   The attack will be made in conjunction with the 2/20th London
   Regiment, who will be advancing on Marcoing, and the 2nd
   Battalion Scots Guards, who will be attacking Leech Trench.

   The strong patrols of the Battalion will debouch for the
   attack from the line of the sunken road at zero + 4 hours 20
   minutes so as to cross the brown line (Beet Trench) at zero +4
   hours and 30 minutes. Approach march orders have been issued
   separately.

   The Battalion will attack with No. 2 Company on right and No.
   4 Company on left in front line, preceded at a distance of 300
   yards by strong patrols.

   Dividing line between the two leading Companies in the attack
   will be T of Beet Trench to A in Log Avenue, all inclusive to
   No. 4 Company.

   No. 3 Company will be in support écheloned behind No. 4
   Company at a distance of 500 yards in readiness to make a
   flank attack on Premy Hill from the north should it be found
   necessary.

   The King's Company will be in Battalion Reserve and will
   follow No. 3 Company at a distance of 500 yards until the
   neighbourhood of Premy Trench is reached, when it will occupy
   suitable shell-holes and trenches.

   Two Stokes mortars, each with 50 rounds, will move immediately
   in rear of and under the command of the O.C. No. 3 Company.

   One section machine-guns will follow in rear of the King's
   Company and will be prepared to assist a flank attack on
   Premy from the north with covering fire and to assist the
   consolidation of Premy Hill by guns placed in the Graincourt
   line.

   Corps heavy artillery will bombard Premy Hill until zero + 5
   hours, when the guns will lift on to Nine Wood for half an
   hour and then cease firing.


The remainder of the orders contained detailed instructions for the
action of the Battalion, if the attack on the right and left proved
successful.

[Sidenote: Sept. 27.]

It was very dark when the Battalion started on its march, and the
artillery on both sides was very quiet. The order of march was No.
2 Company under Captain Carter, No. 4 under Lieutenant Jones, No. 3
under Captain Simpson, and the King's Company under Lieutenant Brown,
while Lord Gort, accompanied by Captain Lovell, the Adjutant, and
some orderlies, walked at the head of the Battalion. On reaching the
Bapaume--Cambrai road a halt was made to wait for zero hour, 5.20 A.M.,
at which time the Battalion was to advance towards Flesquières. At zero
hour the advance began across country to Demicourt. There was at first
very little shelling, but as the Battalion neared the Canal du Nord the
shells began to fall more rapidly. There was no water in the Canal, and
by means of short ladders placed against the banks the crossing was
effected 100 yards north of Lock Seven, with only a dozen casualties,
including Lieutenant Jesper, who was wounded as he reached the near
bank. Lord Gort went back to Lock Seven to confer with the officer
commanding the tanks which were to support the Battalion, and was
unable to find him; it was ascertained later that he had been wounded.
The Battalion had to be in position east of Flesquières at 9.20 A.M.,
and Lord Gort therefore continued the advance without further delay.
The ground over which it was necessary to pass was undulating, and was
swept by the enemy's fire, but the skilful manner in which Lord Gort
conducted this advance accounted for the small number of casualties the
Battalion sustained. The situation did not look very promising, for
the Germans were still holding Graincourt some 4000 yards to the left
rear. The 2nd Battalion was unable to advance on Orival Wood, which
should have been taken before the 1st Battalion started, and the Third
Division, through which the 1st Battalion had to advance, had failed
to carry Beet Trench. On nearing Flesquières, the enemy's machine-gun
fire from the direction of Graincourt became very heavy, and Captain
Carter was killed, being hit in the head. On reaching Flesquières
Lord Gort took the leading companies round the northern edge of the
village, threading a way through the houses, as the machine-gun fire
was heavy from the left flank. Two enemy batteries were still in action
in the neighbourhood of Beet Trench, and the Germans were also holding
the Beetroot Factory and Beet Trench very strongly with infantry and
machine-guns. No sign of any troops on the left could be seen, and
tanks, which were to co-operate, had not yet arrived. Lord Gort himself
took the leading platoons of the two leading companies into position
for assault, and while doing so was slightly wounded over the left
eye. While the patrol platoon of No. 2 Company was crawling forward to
locate the exact position of the enemy, Second Lieutenant Clarke, with
the patrol platoon of No. 4 Company, worked round the left flank of
the enemy, captured Beetroot Factory, and took the garrison prisoners.
It was a skilful and daring manœuvre, as the platoon was fired at from
both flanks, and suffered heavily. One tank now arrived, and Lord Gort
at once decided to push on towards Premy Chapel, in spite of the fact
that no corresponding advance seemed to have been begun on either flank.

Second Lieutenant Clarke, who had returned with his prisoners, was now
ordered to take a platoon from No. 3 Company in support, and again work
round the left flank in order to attack Beet Trench from the rear. Lord
Gort went across the open to a tank, that was working behind the sunken
road, and showed the Commander where to cross, and in what direction to
advance; but when it neared Beet Trench the tank was put out of action
by direct artillery fire. It was now found that the 2nd Battalion Scots
Guards, which should have been advancing on the left flank, was not in
position, nor was the 2nd Battalion Grenadier Guards able to advance on
Orival Wood. On the right the situation was better, for the Sixty-third
Division was reported to be making good progress. The 1st Battalion
Welsh Guards, which was in Brigade Reserve, undertook to come up and
protect the left flank. All the time there were several hostile air
balloons up directing the fire on the tank, and a German aeroplane had
signalled the presence of troops in the sunken road, which immediately
became a target for the enemy's artillery. One shell burst close to
Lord Gort, wounding him severely in the arm, but although an artery
had been cut and he lost a great deal of blood, he refused to go back
to the dressing-station, and asked Captain Lindsay to bind his arm up
temporarily.

His wound, however, proved more serious than he thought, and Captain
Simpson took over command of the Battalion. Somewhat later Lord Gort
insisted on starting off again to join the leading companies, but on
reaching Beet Trench he collapsed from loss of blood.

Meanwhile the platoon of No. 3 Company under Second Lieutenant Clarke
had succeeded in their turning movement, captured a German machine-gun
post, and, in spite of being fired on by our tank, worked round to the
east of Beet Trench. Two hundred Germans were driven into the sunken
road, and forced to surrender, while two batteries of field howitzers
and six machine-guns were captured.

The two leading companies continued their advance and No. 3 Company
moved forward in their support in échelon to their left flank, while
the King's Company moved up to the sunken road in reserve. The enemy
was now shelling the neighbourhood of Beet Trench, and sweeping the
whole ground with machine-gun fire. No. 2 Company reached Labour
Trench, leaving two platoons in support in Premy Trench, but in the
face of point-blank artillery fire from Nine Wood was unable to advance
any farther. Lieutenant A. A. Morris, who was the only officer left
with the company, was killed while advancing with the leading platoons.
Second Lieutenant A. Grant in No. 4 Company was killed about the same
time, while Lieutenant B. Jones was wounded.

The enemy was holding Marcoing on the right flank and a spur by Leech
Alley on the left, so that the whole attack had become wedge-shaped,
and, while no advance was taking place on either flank, the 1st
Battalion continued to drive this wedge into the enemy's lines. But
however successful or daring a manœuvre like this may be, its
ultimate success depends on the knowledge when to stop. In answer to a
message sent by Captain Simpson, Brigadier-General de Crespigny said
that any farther advance was not to be attempted in the face of such
heavy fire, until the left flank had been secured by the advance of
fresh troops through Graincourt. Captain Simpson decided to establish
the main line of resistance in Beet Trench, with a line of outposts
pushed well in front, to act as a screen for the advance of the
Second Division, which was known to be advancing. Accordingly No. 2
Company was withdrawn to Premy Support Trench, No. 3 to the gun-pit and
Beetroot Factory, and the King's and No. 4 Companies to Beet Trench,
with outposts some 300 yards in front. This manœuvre was carried
out under heavy fire, but was executed with such steadiness that the
casualties were few. The men, however, seemed disappointed that they
could not push farther on. The Adjutant, Captain Lovell, was hit by a
machine-gun bullet whilst accompanying Captain Simpson, who had gone up
to superintend the movement.

The Germans appear to have been thoroughly mystified by this attack
throughout the whole operation, and to have imagined that the advance
might eventually develop into a turning movement, threatening their
line of retreat. When the Second Division came up at 2.30, they found
the enemy retreating everywhere before them. As soon as the advance had
been begun by this Division, the 1st Battalion was withdrawn to an area
west of the Canal.

The extraordinary success achieved by the Battalion during this attack
was entirely due to the courage, endurance, and determination of Lord
Gort, who was awarded the V.C. for his conspicuous bravery. He was able
by his example and the reckless exposure of his own life to infuse
into all ranks an indomitable determination to reach the objective, no
matter what the cost might be. He had himself brought the Battalion
to a very high state of efficiency, and there is little doubt that
with a less highly trained battalion such an attack might have ended
disastrously.

The casualties incurred during this attack were: Killed, Captain J.
S. Carter, Lieutenant A. A. Morris, and Second Lieutenant A. Grant;
wounded, Lieut.-Colonel Lord Gort, Captain W. H. Lovell, Lieutenant B.
H. Jones, Lieutenant A. M. Brown, Second Lieutenant J. C. Blunt, Second
Lieutenant L. C. Jesper; and amongst other ranks there were 35 killed
and 24 wounded.

The last days in September were spent by the Battalion reorganising
and re-fitting in bivouacs west of Canal du Nord, when the following
officers arrived: Captain P. M. Spence, M.C., Lieutenant C. G.
Kennaway, Lieutenant R. S. Challands, Lieutenant A. M. Brown, Second
Lieutenant M. G. Farquharson, Second Lieutenant E. A. D. Bliss, Second
Lieutenant N. P. Andrews, Second Lieutenant J. C. Blunt, and Second
Lieutenant R. B. Osborne.


                           THE 2ND BATTALION

[Sidenote: 2nd Batt.]

During the first week in September the Battalion near Adinfer was
training and reorganising, after the heavy losses incurred in the
operations at the end of August. From the 7th to 11th the Battalion,
under Major Harcourt-Vernon, went up into the front line, where it
came in for much shelling, especially from gas-shells, and, although
the troops on each flank carried out offensive operations, it was not
called upon to attack. After ten days spent out of the line, during
which Second Lieutenant K. B. Bibby and Second Lieutenant E. M. Neill
joined, the Battalion moved up to Llama Post.

The following officers took part in the operations on September 27:

    Major G. C. FitzH. Harcourt-Vernon, D.S.O.    Commanding Officer.
    Capt. R. G. Briscoe, M.C.                     Adjutant.
    2nd Lieut. the Hon. S. E. Marsham             Intelligence Officer.
    Capt. L. St. L. Hermon-Hodge                  No. 1 Company.
    2nd Lieut. R. C. M. Bevan                       "      "
    2nd Lieut. E. M. Neill                          "      "
    Lieut. W. H. S. Dent                          No. 2 Company.
    2nd Lieut. D. L. King                           "      "
    2nd Lieut. K. B. Bibby                          "      "
    Lieut. R. H. R. Palmer                        No. 3 Company.
    Lieut. T. A. Combe                              "      "
    Lieut. R. T. Sharpe                             "      "
    Capt. F. H. J. Drummond, M.C.                 No. 4 Company.
    Lieut. C. C. Cubitt                             "      "
    2nd Lieut. P. V. Pelly                          "      "
    Lieut. E. L. Major (U.S. Army)                Medical Officer.

[Sidenote: Sept. 27.]

During the night rain fell, and the tracks were, in consequence, very
slippery. This, added to the fact that some of the bridges which had
been put across the trenches on the previous day had been broken,
caused some delay, and prevented the pack animals, which were following
the companies with hot food containers, from keeping up with the
Battalion; they were consequently sent round by road, but failed to
arrive before the companies left their assembly positions. The enemy's
artillery was exceptionally quiet during the march, and only a few
shells fell in Boursies, as the Battalion passed through. Walsh Trench
and Walsh Support were reached at 4.30 A.M.

The general plan of attack was as follows: Sergison-Brooke's Brigade
was to take the first objective, which was the Hindenburg support line
between Graincourt and Flesquières. The 1st Battalion Irish Guards
was then to pass through and take the second objective, which was the
old British front line of December 1917 to March 1918, just north of
Flesquières. The 2nd Battalion Grenadier Guards was to follow the Irish
Guards, and pass through them in order to exploit any success gained
towards Orival Wood and Graincourt, while Follett's Brigade on the
right would push on towards Nine Wood.

The Battalion moved off at zero plus one hour from its assembly
position, in the normal approach formation with No. 1 Company under
Captain Hermon-Hodge, and No. 2 under Lieutenant Dent in the front
line, and Nos. 3 and 4 Companies under Lieutenant Palmer and Captain
Drummond in support. The ridge west of the Canal du Nord was being
heavily shelled, but the Battalion passed over it with few casualties,
and crossed the Canal itself easily enough with the aid of ladders on
each bank. Any advance through the intricate labyrinth of trenches
in the Hindenburg line was by no means a simple matter, especially
under fire, and the instructions Major Harcourt-Vernon received were
to bring up the Battalion to Soap Trench and Ship Trench in the
Hindenburg support line, and then to advance to the forming-up area.
The Battalion was unable to leave the Hindenburg support line until
8.20 A.M., partly on account of No. 4 Company having lost
direction, and being engaged by machine-gun fire from the left, and
partly on account of Summer Lane not having been completely cleared of
the enemy. In order to deal with this machine-gun nest in Summer Lane,
Major Harcourt-Vernon despatched one platoon under Second Lieutenant
Pelly with orders to clear the Germans out. Second Lieutenant Pelly
successfully carried out his orders, and not only chased the Germans
away, but also took eight prisoners. The advance was then continued,
but a heavy fire from the direction of Graincourt and Knave Trench
caused many casualties, and Second Lieutenant Pelly was wounded. The
mopping up had not been very thorough, and some casualties occurred
from snipers' bullets from the rear.

The Third Division had taken Flesquières, but the Sixty-third Division
had failed to occupy Graincourt, with the result that the Germans
were able to enfilade the troops advancing to Flesquières. When the
Battalion advanced to the Beetroot Factory, two batteries of field-guns
fired at them with open sights, and machine-guns from Graincourt swept
the ground over which they had to pass. On reaching the Beetroot
Factory, the Company Commanders at once sent out patrols to make
good the ground towards Orival Wood, and silence the batteries and
machine-guns, which were causing the casualties, but the volume and
accuracy of the enemy's fire prevented them from making much headway.
Lieutenant Combe and Lieutenant Bevan were wounded, whilst trying to
push forward with patrols, and there seemed no prospect of advancing
until Graincourt had been captured.

In the afternoon the situation underwent a change owing to Lord Gort's
daring advance with the 1st Battalion Grenadier Guards. This had the
effect of moving the whole German line. Graincourt was at last taken,
and an advance on Orival Wood was begun. About 4.30 the Second Division
began to arrive, and in conjunction with the King's Regiment advanced
from Flesquières. This enabled the 2nd Battalion to push through Orival
Wood, although it was unable to debouch from its north edge. Lieutenant
Sharpe was wounded during this advance. The Battalion succeeded in
capturing seven field-guns and three howitzers, in addition to some
forty prisoners. Later in the evening the Fifty-seventh Division
attempted to attack down the Graincourt--Marcoing Road, and met with
little success.

The Battalion was withdrawn at 3 o'clock the next morning, and returned
to a camp on the west of the Canal. The casualties were not heavy. The
Battalion lost 9 men killed, 86 wounded, and 2 missing, in addition to
the 4 officers already mentioned as having been wounded.


                           THE 3RD BATTALION

[Sidenote: 3rd Batt.]

On the 24th the Battalion moved back to Ransart, and reorganised the
companies which had suffered. Lieutenant J. A. Inglis-Jones joined on
the 31st. Lieut.-Colonel Thorne left to take over command of the Ninth
Corps School, and was succeeded by Major Viscount Lascelles.

On September 1 a warning order was received that the Brigade would take
part in an attack, and the following morning the Battalion marched to
Hamelincourt. Under the impression that it would stay there for the
night, Lord Lascelles gave the men orders to collect material in the
ruins of the village, bivouac, and cook their dinners; but bivouacking
took rather longer than was expected, and just when dinners were
cooked, orders were received for the Battalion to move at once to
L'Homme Mort, near St. Leger. The result was that the men had a hurried
meal. At a Brigade conference that was held, verbal orders for the
attack were issued, and it was decided that, rather than risk finding
pockets of Germans within the forming-up positions, it would be safer
to ignore the advance made that morning, and form up on ground that had
been in our possession for several days.

At 1 A.M. the leading company started for the assembly
positions, and although the guide twice lost his way it arrived at the
destination at 3 A.M. An hour later Lord Lascelles went round
the positions and could find no trace of the other three companies. At
5.5 A.M., the hour at which the Battalion was to advance, they
arrived, having been on the march for four hours, owing to inefficient
guides.

The Germans had meanwhile decided not to wait for the attack and had
already retired when the Battalion commenced to advance, so that there
was no fighting. When No. 1 and No. 2 Companies, under Captain Fryer
and Captain Dury, reached the final objective, it was merely a matter
of rounding up a certain number of deserters. Lord Lascelles, on going
up to the leading companies, found a stretch of undulating country in
front with no sign of the enemy, and ordered an advance to the next
ridge, at the same time directing No. 3 Company, under Lieutenant
Cornish in support, and No. 4 Company, under Captain Hirst in reserve,
to move forward as far as the position already occupied by the leading
companies. This sweeping advance with no apparent opposition somewhat
confused the leading companies, which were accustomed during the long
period of trench warfare to short advances with definite objectives.

The fatigue of the men was beginning to tell, and this last advance
was a distinct effort, but by two o'clock in the afternoon the
leading companies had consolidated the position in Boursies. There
were no casualties, although the enemy put up a few shells over the
Battalion, as it topped the ridge 500 yards west of the village.
During the afternoon the German artillery became very busy, and
interfered a good deal with the patrols, but otherwise caused little
or no damage. The men had been on the move since dawn the day before,
and were consequently exhausted, but the Germans made no attempt to
counter-attack, and it was therefore possible to get some rest.

At 5 o'clock the following morning the 3rd Guards Brigade passed
through the Battalion, which was withdrawn to watch the exposed right
flank. The visibility was good, and a few sentries were all that were
required, while the remainder of the Battalion obtained some rest. On
the 5th the Battalion relieved the Welsh Guards in the front line,
and Lord Lascelles decided to move the Battalion Headquarters farther
forward, and to hand over what had been the Welsh Guards Headquarters
to the Medical Officer for an aid-post. Nos. 3 and 4 Companies were
placed in the front line, with Nos. 1 and 2 in support. The right of
the Battalion was not in touch with any troops, there being a gap of
some 500 yards, and this was accounted for by the fact that the ground
was covered with wire of the old Hindenburg line and of the old British
line facing it. This wire was almost impenetrable laterally, and was
at right angles to the line held by the Battalion. The enemy was in
considerable strength in front, and held some 400 yards west of the
Canal du Nord as an outpost line in the old maze of trenches, with a
strong defensive position behind the Canal. The ground sloped down to
the Canal, and the farther the Battalion advanced, the more they were
overlooked from the opposite slope; but the necessity of gaining touch
with the 1st Battalion King's Royal Rifles made an advance necessary.
The line of resistance, about 600 yards behind the front line, which
the Battalion received instructions to dig, was nearly finished, when
the enemy put a concentrated gas bombardment on the valley, where the
Company Headquarters of the two companies in support were placed. For
an hour the Germans bombarded the valley with sneezing-gas shells,
and all the officers and men kept on their masks, but when the gas
bombardment appeared to cease and was succeeded by one of H.E. shells,
every one incautiously took off his mask. This new bombardment proved
to be one of mustard gas. By the time this was realised every one was
being sick, and all the officers and N.C.O.'s were casualties. Lord
Lascelles came up from Battalion Headquarters to see what had happened,
and met Captain Dury being led away blind. There were 61 men in No. 1
Company and 30 men in No. 2 who had been gassed, in addition to the
following officers: Second Lieutenant S. Calvocoressi, Captain G. Dury,
Second Lieutenant W. B. L. Manley, Lieutenant H. P. Gordon, and Second
Lieutenant R. K. Henderson.

In the meantime Lieutenant Cornish, commanding No. 3 Company, had
received orders from Lord Lascelles to close the gap on his right, and
after reconnoitring the situation had established a liaison post with
the King's Royal Rifles at Joan Post. When darkness came he managed
to send out more men, and added two fresh posts south of Goat Trench;
but the ground to be covered was over 500 yards, and the difficulty
was that the line from the right of the Battalion to the left of the
King's Royal Rifles ran diagonally over a crest, and not parallel to
it. Lines of very thick and strong wire ran in irregular lines, and in
various directions. What therefore seemed fairly simple by daylight was
extremely difficult in the dark, since no patrol could keep direction
on account of the wire. A compass was useless, owing to the wire, and
there were no landmarks. Lord Lascelles, who was not at all happy
about his right flank, ordered Lieutenant Cornish to double his liaison
post, and to put up a Véry light perpendicular at dusk from his post on
the left of the gap, so that a detachment from the liaison post could
work towards it.

These measures, although far from satisfactory, were the best that
could be done in the circumstances, and Lieutenant Cornish was
afterwards highly commended for the energy and resource which he showed
in dealing with an admittedly difficult situation.

On the 8th the Battalion was relieved by the 2nd Battalion Grenadiers,
and retired to some trenches in Dunhelm Avenue. From the 8th to the
15th the whole of the 2nd Brigade went into reserve positions near
Lagnicourt, where no incidents of any importance occurred. As a draft
was shortly expected, the companies were not equalised in strength, but
it was Nos. 1 and 2 Companies that had suffered most, and, as the other
two companies would have to lead the attack at the end of the month,
there was no objection to the half-assimilated draft being in reserve.

On the 20th the Battalion was warned that it would shortly have to take
part in the attack on the Canal du Nord, and that it would relieve
the 1st Battalion Scots Guards on the night of the 21st. A piece of
ground was at once selected for practice purposes, and the enemy's
trenches and salient features were taped out on it, while the Royal
Engineers constructed a model of the area to be attacked. The expected
draft arrived just in time to take part in the rehearsal, and was
absorbed in Nos. 1 and 2 Companies. The following day after a Company
Commanders' conference, the details of the attack were carefully
explained by the Commanding Officer, Lord Lascelles, who had attended
a conference at Brigade Headquarters. No. 3 Company and one platoon of
No. 4 were to attack Slag Heap; the remainder of No. 4 Company would
be in support; No. 2 Company would remain where it was in the front
line, and No. 1 would be in Brigade Reserve. Thus all four companies
were to be more or less in the front line, but No. 4 Company, under
Lieutenant Bunbury, was the one most likely to come into touch with the
enemy. During the relief No. 4 Company was raided, but the Welsh Guards
had not yet left the line, and the enemy consequently received a very
warm reception. The possibility of an attack on that part of the line
had already occurred to Lieutenant Bunbury, as a similar raid had been
attempted two days before, and the ground being a regular rabbit-warren
of disused trenches made it extremely difficult to guard against a
surprise; but he kept his company constantly on the alert, and was
ready for the Germans when they came.

On the 25th a heavy barrage descended on the whole front line, and
all wires became disconnected. The enemy raided the position of the
line occupied by No. 4 Company, and managed to get into trenches at
an unoccupied spot, but were ejected by a patrol. There were a few
casualties from the barrage, but no men missing. On the following day
detailed orders for the attack were issued, and the Battalion proceeded
to the assembly position.


           LIST OF OFFICERS WHO TOOK PART IN THE OPERATIONS
                            ON SEPTEMBER 27

    Lieut.-Colonel the Viscount Lascelles, D.S.O  Commanding Officer.
    Capt. E. G. A. Fitzgerald, D.S.O.             Adjutant.
    2nd Lieut. R. C. G. de Reuter                 Intelligence Officer.
    Capt. E. R. M. Fryer, M.C.                    No. 1 Company.
    Lieut. C. C. Carstairs, M.C.                     "     "
    Lieut. F. S. V. Donnison                         "     "
    Capt. A. H. S. Adair, M.C.                    No. 2 Company.
    Lieut. S. G. Fairbairn, M.C.                     "     "
    Lieut. C. B. Hollins                             "     "
    2nd Lieut. J. Chapman                            "     "
    Lieut. E. N. de Geijer, M.C.                  No. 3 Company.
    2nd Lieut. H. J. Gibbon, M.C.                    "     "
    2nd Lieut. A. D. Cooper, D.S.O.                  "     "
    Lieut. E. J. Bunbury, M.C.                    No. 4 Company.
    2nd Lieut. R. P. Papillon                        "     "
    2nd Lieut. G. R. Gunther, M.C.                   "     "
    2nd Lieut. H. I'B. Smith                         "     "
    Lieut. Graff, U.S.A.M.O.R.C.                  Medical Officer.

[Sidenote: Sept. 27.]

The attack of the Battalion was at right angles to the main attack,
which was somewhat confusing; but, as the Battalion was holding a
salient, it was necessary to have the right half Battalion facing east,
one company facing north, and one company (in échelon) facing east.
There was still a pocket of Germans on the left between the Battalion
and the Canal, but the ground was heavily wired and quite impassable.
It was therefore necessary to attack northward, and as there were
many lines of trenches and much wire, the attack had to be organised
in small parties, working over the top of the ground but parallel
with the trenches, so that the wire might be crossed by entering
the trenches. Each party was in charge of an officer or a specially
selected non-commissioned officer, and although there was undoubtedly a
risk of losing many first-rate men, this decision was justified by the
fact that, in spite of the maze of trenches, none of the parties failed
to reach their objectives.

No. 3 Company, under Lieutenant de Geijer, reached Slag Heap, and got
touch with the 1st Battalion Coldstream. An aid-post was established
there, and parties began to move up Donkey and Dog Trench, when the
Coldstream reported that they were suffering heavy casualties from
their left flank. Instructions were at once sent by Lord Lascelles
to keep down the machine-gun fire referred to, but the Battalion was
itself subjected to a heavy fire from two machine-guns, which swept
most of the ground crossed by carrying parties, and caused casualties
among unsuspecting troops in rear. Two Stokes mortars were ordered up,
but as soon as the Germans saw them coming into position they retired.
Lance-Corporal Watson crossed the Canal with Private Parry in order to
silence another machine-gun (probably the gun which was harassing the
Coldstream), and succeeded in capturing not only the gun but an officer
and seven men near Kangaroo Trench. Second Lieutenant Gibbon with three
men took half a dozen prisoners, and sent them back down a trench. As
the last German disappeared round the traverse, he treacherously drew
a bomb from his pocket and threw it at Second Lieutenant Gibbon and
his men, who had just enough time to run round another traverse. No. 3
Company took 83 prisoners, including the wounded, and 23 machine-guns,
and their casualties were not heavy, for they only had 12 men wounded
and 2 missing. In the evening verbal orders were received to move back
to Doignies.




                             CHAPTER XXXIV

                                OCTOBER

                          _Diary of the War_


[Sidenote: Oct. 1918.]

In France the German retirement continued, and the British Army made
considerable progress, while the French were equally successful in
hastening the retreat of the enemy near St. Quentin and later at
Soissons. King Albert's attack threatened to cut off part of the
German Army in Belgium, and in order to prevent this, the Germans were
forced to retire precipitately, leaving behind them vast stores of war
material. Ostend, Lille, and Douai were evacuated, and Sir Roger Keyes,
who commanded what was known as the Dover Patrol, landed on the Belgian
coast. The German intention appears to have been to retire from Belgium
as speedily as possible, and in so doing to avoid any large number of
men being surrounded.

In Italy the Austrians were in full retreat, and on the 27th sued for
Peace.

In Palestine General Allenby, after a series of brilliant operations,
succeeded in cutting off the main portion of the Turkish Army on the
Tigris, with the result that Turkey asked for an Armistice.


                          THE GUARDS DIVISION

In October the Germans found the retirement more and more difficult.
During September they had lost a quarter of a million prisoners and
an immense number of guns, and their original intention of making a
determined stand on one of their deeply fortified lines had long since
been abandoned. The Allied Armies were pressing them back all along
the line, and the continual retirement was beginning to affect the
spirit of the Army. After the Siegfried line had been broken through,
Sir Douglas Haig commenced operations on a seventeen-mile front from
Cambrai to Sequehart with the Third and Fourth Armies, and the Sixth
Corps, in which the Guards Division was, advanced to the south of
Cambrai.

On October 6 Major-General Matheson received a warning order to be
prepared to move to Havrincourt, but this move was postponed later for
twenty-four hours. The Guards Division was in support of the Second
and Third Divisions, and in the event of little opposition being
encountered was to pass through and continue the advance on La Henières
and Igniel-dit-les-Frisettes, but as the Germans offered a stubborn
resistance the Guards Division did not go into the line until the next
day.

All sorts of wild rumours were about, and as there seemed every danger
of the enemy making use of them to gain time, Major-General Matheson
issued the following order:

   (1) Rumours are current that the German Government intends
   to propose a suspension of hostilities, with a view to the
   discussion of Peace terms. It is possible that attempts at
   fraternisation may in consequence be made by German troops in
   the line.

   (2) The German Army is hard pressed and the German High
   Command needs time to carry out its present withdrawal without
   heavy loss in men and material. German Peace talk is therefore
   circulated in order to relax our pressure, gain time for the
   withdrawal, and prepare for a long defensive campaign next
   year.

   (3) All our troops will be warned against paying any attention
   to rumours of this kind. They are intended not to shorten
   the war but to save the German Army from the consequences of
   defeat this year and to preserve its strength for the defence
   of German soil next year. Any attempts made by the enemy to
   fraternise in the field will also be disregarded absolutely.

It is our intention to beat the enemy as fast as we can, not to allow
him to recover his strength.

On the morning of October 9 De Crespigny's Brigade on the right, and
Sergison-Brooke's Brigade on the left, passed through the Third and
Second Divisions, and attacked under a barrage.

It was expected that the Caudry--Cambrai railway, running diagonally
across the line of advance, with its steep embankments and deep
cuttings, would form a serious obstacle, and special steps were taken
to bring enfilade artillery and machine-gun fire to bear on it, till
the infantry was within assaulting distance. It was soon found,
however, that the enemy had withdrawn during the night, and it was not
till late in the afternoon that the German advanced troops were again
located, holding a line of trenches west of Boistrancourt and east of
Igniel-dit-les-Frisettes. A night operation to capture Boistrancourt
revealed the farther withdrawal of the enemy.

On the 10th De Crespigny's and Sergison-Brooke's Brigades followed up
the enemy, and after some skirmishing with his rear-guards, took up an
outpost line west of Quevy and St. Hilaire, with detached posts east of
those villages.

On the morning of the 11th the 3rd Guards Brigade, which was now under
the command of Brigadier-General Heywood, passed through the outposts,
and was soon engaged with the German rear-guards, which were now
fighting stubbornly.

The next few days were spent in clearing the enemy from the west bank
of the River Selle, after which there was a pause to allow time for
the reconstruction of the railways in rear. The most difficult problem
of this period was the evacuation of the civil population from the
villages on the banks of the Selle, which were occupied by both our own
and the enemy's troops. The evacuation was carried out by night with
scarcely a casualty.

On the 20th the Guards Division took part in a general attack, launched
with the object of driving the enemy from his new positions, east of
the River Selle. The attack, which started at 1 A.M., was
carried out by De Crespigny's Brigade on the right, and Heywood's
Brigade on the left. The Sixty-second Division was to clear Solesmes
of the enemy on the right of the Guards Division, and the Nineteenth
Division was to capture Haussy on the left. A great deal of the
success of this attack depended on whether the River Selle was held in
any strength, but the Germans never attempted to dispute the passage,
and both Brigades passed over with little loss. The first objective
was secured without difficulty, but when the advance to the second
objective commenced, a good deal of opposition was encountered,
especially on the left, where the Nineteenth Division had been held
up after capturing Haussy. The resistance was so stubborn that at one
time artillery preparation was contemplated; but when the Sixty-second
Division advanced towards Romeries, the Guards Division was able to
secure the second objective, and even push out patrols as far as the
River Harpies.

During the afternoon the Germans put down on the new positions an
artillery concentration, which many officers present considered to have
been the heaviest they had experienced since the battle of the Somme;
our troops were, however, so well dug in that hardly any casualties
were inflicted. On the night of the 22nd the Division was relieved by
the Second Division, which continued the attack the following day.

The remainder of the month was spent in rest, which was, however, much
interfered with by the constant change of quarters, necessitated by the
withdrawal of the enemy.


                           THE 1ST BATTALION

[Sidenote: 1st Batt.]

At the beginning of October Major the Hon. W. R. Bailey arrived, and
took command of the Battalion. On the 7th orders were received to
proceed to Havrincourt, where the Guards Division was to be in reserve
during an attack by the Second and Third Divisions. The attack proved
successful, and on the evening of the 8th the Battalion moved to
Marcoing, where it was bivouacked in some old trenches. On the 9th the
1st and 2nd Guards Brigade attacked, and the 3rd Guards Brigade was
in Divisional Reserve. The Battalion marched by platoons at 100 yards
intervals to Seranvillers _via_ Masnières and Crevecour. The next
day it moved on to Cattenières, and Major Bailey, accompanied by the
Company Commanders, rode on to Bévillers to reconnoitre.


           LIST OF OFFICERS WHO TOOK PART IN THE OPERATIONS
                              IN OCTOBER

    Major the Hon. W. R. Bailey, D.S.O.      Commanding Officer.
    Lieut. J. A. Lloyd                       Acting Adjutant.
    2nd Lieut. J. C. Blunt                   Intelligence Officer.
    Capt. P. M. Spence, M.C.                 King's Company.
    2nd Lieut. D. H. Clarke                     "      "
    Lieut. C. G. Kennaway                    No. 2 Company.
    2nd Lieut. R. B. Osborne                    "      "
    2nd Lieut. M. G. Farquharson                "      "
    Capt. J. H. C. Simpson                   No. 3 Company.
    2nd Lieut. N. P. Andrews                    "      "
    Lieut. E. A. D. Bliss                    No. 4 Company.
    2nd Lieut. C. B. Hall                       "      "
    2nd Lieut. R. S. Challands                  "      "
    Capt. W. Lindsay, R.A.M.C.               Medical Officer.
    Capt. the Rev. C. Venables               Chaplain.

  [Illustration: _Operations_

  _October 11-14, 1918_

   _Emery Walker Ltd._
  ]

[Sidenote: Oct. 11.]

On the 11th the Battalion moved off at 1 A.M., and reached
the rendezvous just east of Bévillers at 4 A.M. It was a very
dark night, drizzling with rain, and the marching was difficult owing
to the mine craters, with which the enemy had endeavoured to destroy
the road, transport wagons constantly falling in, and delaying the
march. The Battalion had been allotted a front of about 2000 yards,
which was covered by the King's Company under Captain Spence on the
right, and No. 2 Company under Lieutenant Kennaway on the left, each
with two platoons in the front line acting as fighting patrols, and two
platoons in the second line with the Company Commanders. No. 3 Company
under Captain Simpson was in support, and No. 4 under Lieutenant Bliss
in Brigade Reserve. The country was quite open with no cover at all,
and consisted of grass and stubble fields. The gently undulating ground
was particularly favourable to the Germans, who were past-masters in
the art of fighting rear-guard actions. At 5 A.M. the advance
began. The first bound was to the railway east of the village of
Quiévy, but no halt was made here, as it was found that the advanced
troops of the 1st Guards Brigade had pushed farther on during the
night. When the leading patrols reached the high ground immediately
east of Quiévy, they were met by heavy machine-gun fire from the
orchard north of Fontaine-au-terre Farm, and were enfiladed by numerous
machine-guns along the St. Vaast--Solesmes road. The leading companies
deployed here. The King's and No. 2 Companies, covered by their own
fire, continued to advance by rushes, and captured the orchard, from
which the Germans hastily retired. Captain Simpson halted No. 3 Company
on the high ground west of the farm, while south of the farm touch
was gained with the 2nd Battalion Auckland Regiment from the New
Zealand Division. The machine-gun fire from the left flank, where the
Scots Guards were checked, continued to be very severe, and completely
held up No. 2 Company. Captain Spence decided to push forward with
the King's Company to try and outflank the enemy's posts, and sent
forward one platoon down the slope. Although this had the desired
effect, and the German infantry retired, they left their machine-guns,
which kept up a sweeping fire along the crest, and prevented the Scots
Guards from advancing. It was thought that, if a demonstration was
made straight towards them, it might perhaps force them to retire,
but when No. 2 Company attempted this the German machine-guns never
moved. Meanwhile the King's Company, with that dogged determination
which has characterised all its movements during the war, drove away
the Germans from the spur of the hill south of Solesmes, and working
round in the area occupied by the New Zealand Division, pushed forward,
and gained the spur itself. The ground over which the King's Company
passed, consisted of a deep and broad valley quite devoid of cover,
and the slightest movement could be observed from the opposite slope,
where German field-guns and machine-guns were posted. The manner in
which Captain Spence directed his company and surmounted all the
difficulties, was specially mentioned by Lieut.-Colonel Bailey, and
this advance undoubtedly made a considerable difference to the centre
of the Guards Division. But the forward position, which the King's
Company had gained, was by no means easy to retain, for the men were
subjected to a heavy machine-gun fire from the north, whilst the
enemy's 5·9 guns registered on them. These men remained unable to
move a muscle until dark, when they dug themselves in. No. 3 Company
was moved up to an orchard in close support, and, as there seemed no
reasonable prospect of success during daylight without heavy loss,
it was not pushed up into the attack. The German machine-guns were
wonderfully well placed, commanding the flat plateaus on the top
of the ridges, with no possibility of their being approached under
cover, and our artillery was unable to help, as it was practically
impossible to locate these machine-gun nests. The men were anxious
to push on, and had to be restrained. All this time the shelling was
heavy but promiscuous, and several men were hit by fragments. Captain
Simpson, Second Lieutenant Clarke, and Second Lieutenant Osborne were
wounded in this way, but the Battalion was really very fortunate in
not having suffered more than it did. Although patrols were sent out
during the night, they were unable to get very far on account of the
enemy's machine-guns, which had evidently been pushed forward to hinder
reconnaissance.

[Sidenote: Oct. 12.]

The next morning it was found that the Germans had retired, and that
the machine-guns had all been withdrawn, the emplacements being full
of empty cartridge cases. Except for some shelling the morning proved
uneventful, and in the afternoon the 2nd Battalion Scots Guards and
1st Battalion Welsh Guards were ordered to attack on the left. Two
platoons from No. 2 Company of the 1st Battalion were ordered to
co-operate with them and guard their right flank. The advance was
successfully carried out with little opposition, although the German
artillery put down a heavy barrage on the west line. The company
runners in this fight behaved with great gallantry, and throughout
the day carried their lives in their hands, continually running great
risks. Posts were ordered to be pushed down to the railway, and small
reconnoitring patrols were sent out as soon as it was dark. Except
at the commencement of the operations the Battalion saw few Germans,
and the men realised they were fighting a very cleverly hidden enemy.
Each machine-gun nest had to be located, and shot out in turn. During
that night the King's Company was relieved by No. 4, and No. 3 by No.
2. Lieutenant Challands, who took over command of No. 3 Company, was
knocked out temporarily by the bursting of a shell during the relief.
The Battalion was the only one in the Division to reach its objective,
and this was entirely due to the dash displayed by both officers and
men in this entirely new form of open warfare.

The 2nd Battalion Scots Guards and 1st Battalion Welsh Guards advanced
up to the same line, held by the 1st Battalion Grenadiers. The rest of
the day was very trying for all troops in the forward area on account
of the continual shelling, as the Germans had excellent observation,
and were very accurate in their shooting. The line from Solesmes to
St. Python was very strongly held, and the two posts on the right
held by the Battalion were in dangerous proximity to the enemy. One
of these was rushed by a party of eighty Germans under cover of an
intense Minenwerfer barrage, and only one man escaped. In the evening
the Battalion was relieved by the 2nd Battalion Coldstream Guards, and
marched by companies to Quiévy. The casualties during the three days'
operations were 3 officers wounded, and of other ranks 11 were killed,
3 died of wounds, 45 wounded and 17 missing.

The next day Major Bailey received the following message from
Brigadier-General C. P. Heywood, Commanding the 3rd Guards Brigade:

   I should like to put on record my appreciation of the good
   work done by you and your Battalion during the past three
   days. I was particularly impressed with the initiative and
   determined action of the King's Company in pushing forward on
   the afternoon of the 11th to the advanced position in D 12
   central.

On the 15th Major-General T. G. Matheson, Commanding the Guards
Division, addressed the following message to Brigadier-General Heywood:

   I wish to congratulate the Brigadier and all ranks of the 3rd
   Guards Brigade on the manner in which they carried out the
   task assigned to them from October 11th to 14th.

   The advance of the 1st Batt. Grenadier Guards towards Solesmes
   and of the 2nd Batt. Scots Guards to St. Python were carried
   out with very much gallantry and produced very valuable
   results in securing us command of the crossings of the River
   Selle. The hard fighting of the 1st Batt. Welsh Guards on the
   left flank contributed largely to the success of the other two
   Battalions.

   I am much pleased with the performance of the Brigade and
   should like my appreciation to be conveyed to all ranks.

Two days, the 14th and 15th, were spent at Quiévy cleaning up and
reorganising, but on the evening of the second day the enemy bombarded
the billeting area with 8-inch shells, when two men were killed and
nine were wounded. On the 17th the Battalion marched to Carmières,
where Major Bailey attended a Brigade conference. On the 19th the
Battalion marched by companies with intervals of 200 yards to St.
Vaast, and sheltered in houses and cellars until 10.15 P.M.,
when they moved up to the assembly area, directed by guides from the
1st Battalion Coldstream Guards.


           LIST OF OFFICERS WHO TOOK PART IN THE OPERATIONS
                             OCTOBER 20-22

    Major the Hon. W. R. Bailey, D.S.O.      Commanding Officer.
    2nd Lieut. J. C. Blunt                   Acting Adjutant.
    Lieut. R. F. W. Echlin                   Transport Officer.
    Lieut. R. G. Buchanan                    Act.-Quartermaster.
    Capt. P. M. Spence, M.C.                 King's Company.
    Lieut. A. M. Brown                          "      "
    2nd Lieut. L. E. G. Wall                    "      "
    Lieut. C. G. Kennaway                    No. 2 Company.
    2nd Lieut. R. B. Osborne                    "      "
    2nd Lieut. M. G. Farquharson                "      "
    Capt. J. H. C. Simpson                   No. 3 Company.
    2nd Lieut. G. S. Lamont                     "      "
    2nd Lieut. L. F. A. d'Erlanger              "      "
    2nd Lieut. N. P. Andrews                    "      "
    Lieut. A. E. D. Bliss                    No. 4 Company.
    Lieut. R. S. Challands                      "      "
    2nd Lieut. C. B. Hall                       "      "
    Capt. W. Lindsay, R.A.M.C.               Medical Officer.
    Capt. the Rev. C. Venables               Chaplain.

The night was dark and it was pouring with rain, when the Battalion
formed up along the line of railway between Haussy and St. Vaast. It is
impossible adequately to describe the absolute wretchedness of forming
up on a pitch-dark night in pouring rain. An operation seemed hopeless,
and was only possible by giving careful instructions to every single
man in the Battalion. Plenty of time was allowed to prepare for this
fight, but the Battalion was only just ready when the time came to
advance. No. 4 Company, under Lieutenant Bliss, was on the left; No. 3
Company, under Lieutenant Challands, in the centre; and No. 2 Company,
under Lieutenant Kennaway, on the right. Touch was obtained with the
8th Battalion Gloucester Regiment in the Nineteenth Division on the
left, and with the Irish Guards on the right. The Royal Engineeers had
arranged to lay tapes from the railway to the eight temporary bridges,
which they had put over the River Selle, but these tapes were not laid
until shortly before zero hour, and one tape did not lead to a bridge,
with the result that the platoon which followed it had to wade across
the river.

[Sidenote: Oct. 20.]

From the very start everything went well, and the barrage moved with
perfect precision. Chasing the Germans in the dark in this way was
not without excitement, as no one knew whether they would remain and
fight, or retire as soon as they were threatened. It was a great relief
to Major Bailey to find that the enemy had no intention of disputing
the crossing of the river, as this would have entailed the loss of
a number of men at the start. As it was, the Battalion proceeded in
artillery formation as far as the Haussy--Solesmes road, passing over
five or six lines of rifle-pits wonderfully well made in concrete. When
the creeping barrage began to move forward, the Battalion moved with
it, but there was little or no opposition, and the objective was gained
according to scheduled time. The few prisoners that were captured said
that the garrisons of their posts had fled as soon as the barrage
began. Direction was admirably kept, and the men advanced close up
to the barrage, in spite of the heavy plough on the side of the hill
on which they had to advance. The 2nd Battalion Scots Guards and 1st
Battalion Welsh Guards then came through, and continued the advance. In
the evening the German artillery put down a very heavy barrage on the
railway, shifting it later to the road, and then covering the objective
and the reverse slope of the hill, but in spite of the shelling the
casualties were not heavy.

[Sidenote: Oct. 21.]

The shelling continued all the next day, but the 3rd Guards Brigade was
not required. In the evening the Battalion took over the whole Brigade
front from the Scots Guards and Welsh Guards; the King's and No. 3
Companies were placed in the outpost line; and Nos. 2 and 4 Companies
took over the main line of resistance on the high ground east of the
Solesmes--Vendegies road.

[Sidenote: Oct. 22.]

The line of the Solesmes road was shelled all day, but the Battalion
was very lucky, although No. 4 Company was rather seriously gassed.
Lieutenant E. A. D. Bliss and Second Lieutenant C. B. Hall and ten
men were all gassed. In the evening the Highland Light Infantry
relieved the Battalion, which marched back to billets in St. Vaast.
These operations on the whole had been easy, as the Germans had put
up very little resistance, but the rain and mud had made everything
very miserable, and the men were soaked to the skin before the attack
commenced.

In all the villages round about civilians emerged from cellars, having
hidden there for five days in order to avoid being evacuated by the
Germans. Among the German prisoners, who had been captured during the
advance, were several regimental commanders of the true Prussian type,
with florid faces and bristling moustaches. They presented a sorry
spectacle in the cages, and seemed to feel their position acutely.

  [Illustration:

    _Langfier Ltd photographers      Emery Walker ph. sc._

  _Brigadier-General Lord Henry Seymour, D.S.O._
  ]

On the 23rd the following special order was issued:

   The Commanding Officer congratulates all ranks on the way in
   which the attack of the 20th was carried out. The difficulties
   of a night attack are always great, but in this case they
   were almost entirely eliminated by the obvious care with
   which the officers and N.C.O.'s had made their preparations
   and explained the scheme of attack to their men. No one lost
   direction, and the orders given out beforehand were carried
   out almost to the letter.

   The conditions have been very bad, but as always you have made
   the best of things and have kept up the Grenadier tradition of
   invariable cheerfulness under hardships. You are now out for
   a short time to reorganise and refit. In a day's time the
   Battalion will be as keen and smart as it was before, and
   I am confident that that spirit which has carried you through
   this attack so well will be as good and keen in any other
   operation which you may be called upon to perform in future.

   I congratulate all ranks, and I sympathise with you for not
   having found more Germans to kill, which would have made up
   in some small degree for all the worry and anxiety of the
   preliminary preparations.

                       (Signed) W. R. BAILEY, Lt.-Col.
                              Commanding 1st Batt. Gren. Gds.


While the Second Division continued the attack, the 3rd Guards
Brigade remained in billets in St. Vaast. On the 25th Lieutenant H.
Freeman-Greene and Lieutenant W. A. Pembroke joined the Battalion.


                           THE 2ND BATTALION

[Sidenote: 2nd Batt.]

After the operations at the end of September the Battalion bivouacked
close to the village of Demicourt for ten days' training. Meanwhile
Lieut.-Colonel Rasch, having been appointed to command the 1st
Provisional Battalion at Aldershot, left for England, and Major C. F.
A. Walker, M.C., took over the 2nd Battalion.

The following officers took part in the fighting on October 9:

    Major C. F. A. Walker, M.C.      Commanding Officer.
    Capt. R. G. Briscoe, M.C.        Adjutant.
    Lieut. W. H. S. Dent.            Intelligence Officer.
    Lieut. L. Holbech, M.C.          No. 1 Company.
    Lieut. C. L. F. Boughey             "     "
    2nd Lieut. E. M. Neill              "     "
    Capt. G. B. Wilson               No. 2 Company.
    2nd Lieut. D. L. King               "     "
    2nd Lieut. C. J. N. Adams           "     "
    Capt. J. C. Cornforth, M.C.      No. 3 Company.
    2nd Lieut. K. B. Bibby              "     "
    2nd Lieut. E. G. Harcourt-Vernon    "     "
    Lieut. R. H. R. Palmer           No. 4 Company.
    Lieut. C. C. Cubitt                 "     "
    2nd Lieut. B. R. Osborne            "     "
    Lieut. E. L. Coffin              Medical Officer.

During the night of the 7th the Battalion moved into some trenches
near Marcoing, and next morning it crossed the St. Quentin Canal at
Masnières. The canal was being shelled at the time, but the Battalion
escaped without any casualties. Orders were now received for the
Battalion to take part in an attack, the first objective being the
La Targette--Forenville road, and the second the railway running
north-east of Wambaix. In view of the possibility of the enemy being
forced to retire, the instructions were that the leading companies were
to push on in the general direction of Cattenières.

[Sidenote: Oct. 9.]

Zero was 6 o'clock on the morning of October 9, and the assembly area
for the 1st Guards Brigade was on the line of old German trenches,
south-west of Seranvillers. Taking up its position on the left of the
line, the Battalion had the 2nd Battalion Coldstream Guards on its
right, with the 1st Battalion Irish Guards in reserve. In conjunction
with this force, the 2nd Guards Brigade was to advance on the left and
the New Zealand Division on the right, and the boundary between the two
leading battalions was the main road through Seranvillers and Wambaix.

It had been arranged for the barrage to descend on the first
objective, and so the 2nd Battalion Grenadiers and 2nd Battalion
Coldstream were able to start moving slowly forward ten minutes before
zero hour. No. 3 Company of the Battalion, under Captain Cornforth,
was on the right and No. 4 Company, under Lieutenant Palmer, on the
left, while No. 2 Company, under Captain Wilson, was in support, and
No. 1 Company, under Lieutenant Holbech, in reserve. The foremost
companies advanced in waves, and the supports and reserves in artillery
formation, preceded by strong patrols, Captain Wilson's company being
responsible for clearing the village of Seranvillers. Two howitzers,
a field-gun, several machine-guns, and a few prisoners were captured
without any real opposition, and the Battalion pushed on very rapidly
to within a short distance of Cattenières, where the patrols were sent
ahead through the village.

But as soon as they emerged from Cattenières, and came on to the ridge
to the north they were held up by heavy machine-gun fire from the wood
surrounding the factory at Ignies-le-Petit. There was a considerable
stretch of open ground in front of the wood, and progress became very
difficult. Lieutenant Palmer, commanding No. 4 Company, ordered Second
Lieutenant Osborne to try and advance with his platoon on the left in
order to enfilade the enemy in the south-east corner of the wood. A
certain amount of ground was gained by sectional rushes under extremely
heavy machine-gun fire, but the complete lack of "dead" ground made
real success impossible, and Major Walker decided to postpone any
farther move until it could be made under cover of darkness.

A wonderfully gallant piece of work during this part of the fighting
was done by No. 16796 Private Edgar Holmes, and won for him the
Victoria Cross, which unfortunately he did not live to receive. He
was acting as a stretcher-bearer, and calmly and fearlessly went on
with his errands of mercy to the wounded under a withering machine-gun
fire. He succeeded in getting two men in, and, quite regardless of
the intense fire at close range, was attending to a third when he was
himself hit in the stomach. He did not falter for a moment, and, paying
no attention to his own wound, went forward once more to rescue yet
another of the fallen. He had covered thirty yards in the direction of
the enemy when he was hit again, this time fatally.

At 1 A.M. on October 10 Major Walker brought up the support
and reserve companies, and directed them to attack the wood and factory
at Ignies-le-Petit. They rushed the factory, encountering little
resistance, and then took up a line and dug in on the farther edge
of the wood, beyond the main road. The whole advance was a complete
success, and the casualties of the Battalion were only one man killed
and 12 wounded. Four hours after the attack began, the 1st Battalion
Irish Guards passed through the Battalion, and went in pursuit of the
retreating Germans.

For the week that followed the Battalion was in Brigade Reserve,
and moved slowly forward through Fresnoy Farm, Bévillers, Quiévy,
Boussières to St. Hilaire, when it prepared for the forthcoming attack.

In the operations on the 20th the officers engaged were:

    Major C. F. A. Walker, M.C.        Commanding Officer.
    Lieut. S. T. S. Clarke, M.C.       Adjutant.
    2nd Lieut. A. F. Alington          Intelligence Officer.
    Lieut. L. Holbech, M.C.            No. 1 Company.
    Lieut. C. L. F. Boughey               "     "
    2nd Lieut. E. M. Neill                "     "
    Capt. G. B. Wilson                 No. 2 Company.
    2nd Lieut. D. L. King                 "     "
    2nd Lieut. C. J. N. Adams             "     "
    Capt. L. St. L. Hermon-Hodge       No. 3 Company.
    2nd Lieut. K. B. Bibby                "     "
    2nd Lieut. E. G. Harcourt-Vernon      "     "
    Lieut. H. B. G. Morgan, M.C.       No. 4 Company.
    Lieut. C. C. Cubitt                   "     "
    2nd Lieut. B. R. Osborne              "     "
    Lieut. E. L. Coffin                Medical Officer.

This attack was only part of a very extensive movement on the whole of
the Third Army front. The Sixty-first Division was ordered to advance
on the right of the Guards Division, and the Nineteenth Division, under
Major-General Jefferies, on the left. Acting as the leading battalion
on the right of the Guards Division, the 2nd Battalion Grenadier Guards
had the Valenciennes--Solesmes road as its first objective, and, for
its second, a line about a quarter of a mile west of the villages of
Vertain and Romeries. The capture of Solesmes, which was known to be
full of civilians, and strongly held by the enemy, was entrusted to
the Sixty-first Division, while the Guards Division was to push right
on to its final objective. This gave the Battalion the delicate and
dangerous task of advancing the whole way with an exposed flank. Two
other features added to the difficulty of the manœuvre. The long
distance to the final objective had to be traversed under cover of
darkness, and before it could reach the outskirts of Solesmes, known as
St. Python, the Battalion had to cross the River Selle.

[Sidenote: Oct. 19.]

Leaving St. Hilaire at 9.30 P.M. on the 19th inst., the
Battalion followed the 1st Battalion Irish Guards until it reached
its assembly position, which was the railway running from Haussy to
Solesmes. No. 1 Company under Lieutenant Holbech was on the right,
No. 2 Company on the left under Captain Wilson, No. 3 under Captain
Hermon-Hodge in support, and No. 4 under Lieutenant Morgan in reserve.
A drizzling rain fell incessantly, and though the moon was full it was
a very dark night.

[Sidenote: Oct. 20.]

At zero hour, 2 A.M., under a heavy and very effective
barrage, the Battalion advanced to the river in artillery formation,
guided by tapes. Very indifferent bridges had been erected by the Royal
Engineers and the Pioneer Battalion of the Coldstream Guards, and it
was no easy matter getting all the men across in single file on two
extremely narrow planks. However, there were very few casualties, and
the leading companies deployed into waves, and went forward, followed
by the supports and reserves in artillery formation. Very soon after
the start No. 1 Company got to St. Python, but as it was entering it
came under heavy machine-gun fire from the houses. Some useful bombing
work was carried out at this juncture, especially by No. 1 platoon,
led by Corporal Hunter. As the barrage was moving forward, Lieutenant
Holbech decided to leave one platoon to complete the capture of St.
Python, supported by No. 3 Company, while the rest of the leading
companies went on to their first objective, which they reached almost
to schedule time. About 50 prisoners and several machine-guns were
captured in this stage of the attack.

There was an hour's halt at this point, in the course of which the
remaining platoon of No. 1 Company joined up with the leading troops.
It had been uphill work all the way, with a good deal of wire to get
through, and it had been found necessary to constitute No. 3 Company a
defensive flank. Just before another move was due, a party of the enemy
was seen on the right rear of the Battalion, firing lights towards
Solesmes. One platoon under Lieutenant Holbech wheeled about, and
charged it from the rear, "getting home" with the bayonet and capturing
several machine-guns.

The final objective was reached soon after 4 o'clock. But the Germans
were inclined to hold on to their positions, and all the way the
two leading companies met with resistance. This was partly owing to
machine-gun fire from the right flank, as up to this time Solesmes had
not yet been cleared by the Sixty-first Division. On the line of the
final objective No. 1 Company took a field-gun with its garrison of one
officer and 25 men--which brought the total captures of the Battalion
in the attack up to 200 prisoners, two field-guns, and a large number
of machine-guns and trench mortars.

By daylight the leading companies had consolidated their line of
outposts, and in order to protect the right rear of the Battalion, No.
3 Company dug in in échelon to the right flank, with No. 4 Company in
rear of it. About 9 A.M. the Sixty-first Division continued
its advance from Solesmes, and came up into line with the Battalion.
Soon after dawn heavy enemy machine-gun fire had been brought to bear
upon the leading companies, and continued for several hours, while the
German artillery, which up to this time had taken little part in the
operations, began to assert itself, and shells of every sort fell round
the battalion. Lieutenant E. M. Neill, who had been conspicuous for his
work and bravery during the advance, was wounded by shell-fire, and the
total casualties were one officer and 52 other ranks. On the evening of
the 22nd the Battalion was relieved by the 24th Royal Fusiliers, and
marched back to St. Vaast, where it "embussed" for Carnières. There it
remained until the end of the month, when it moved on to St. Hilaire,
proceeding the following day to Capelle.


                           THE 3RD BATTALION

[Sidenote: 3rd Batt.]

In the first week in October the Battalion remained at Doignies,
where during a practice attack a barrage from a smoke rifle grenade
was tried, and on the 8th moved to Premy Chapel. An attack was being
made by the Sixty-second Division, and the Battalion, which was not
called upon, moved on later to Masnières. Cambrai could be seen in the
distance burning fiercely throughout the night.

On the 9th the orders were not received until the Battalion was in its
assembly position.

The following officers took part in these operations:

    Lieut.-Colonel the Viscount Lascelles,
      D.S.O.                                       Commanding Officer.
    Capt. E. G. A. Fitzgerald, D.S.O.              Adjutant.
    Lieut. R. C. G. de Reuter                      Intelligence Officer.
    Capt. E. R. M. Fryer, M.C.                     No. 1 Company.
    Lieut. K. A. Campbell, D.S.O.                     "     "
    2nd Lieut. G. R. Gunther, M.C.                    "     "
    Capt. A. H. S. Adair, M.C.                     No. 2 Company.
    Lieut. S. G. Fairbairn, M.C.                      "     "
    Lieut. C. B. Hollins                              "     "
    Lieut. F. Anson, M.C.                          No. 3 Company.
    2nd Lieut. H. J. Gibbon, M.C.                     "     "
    Capt. E. J. Bunbury, M.C.                      No. 4 Company.
    2nd Lieut. A. E. F. F. Strangways-Rogers          "     "
    2nd Lieut. H. I'B. Smith                          "     "
    2nd Lieut. R. P. Papillon                         "     "
    Capt. J. H. Graff, U.S.A.M.O.R.C.              Medical Officer.
    Capt. the Rev. S. Phillimore, M.C.             Chaplain.

[Sidenote: Oct. 9.]

In the early part of the attack one of our guns appears to have been
badly laid, with the result that it continued to shoot short, causing
several casualties among the leading companies of the Battalion. This
was particularly irritating, since only a short time before these
companies had been mistaken for the enemy, and had been fired at by
one of our own aeroplanes. The first objective was taken by 6.30, and
no Germans were encountered, the only casualties being caused by our
barrage.

The Battalion started off with No. 1 Company under Captain Fryer on the
right, No. 2 under Captain Adair on the left, No. 3 under Lieutenant
Anson in support, and No. 4 under Captain Bunbury in reserve. As
there seemed every possibility of the Germans retiring rapidly, the
scheme of attack was ambitious, with a large extent of ground to be
covered. The first objective was a trench running from Niergnies to
Seranvillers; the second objective the road running from Cambrai to
La Targette; and after that there were four "bounds," ending up with
the Cambrai--Beauvois road. There was no sign of the enemy, not even
any hostile shelling at first, and no difficulty was experienced in
securing the objectives. In the second bound, Wambaix Copse, which
might possibly have been held by the enemy, was also taken without
opposition. At 10.30 the capture of Estourmel was effected, and still
the enemy had shown no sign of fighting. Lord Lascelles decided
that the dinners should be eaten now, and as the 1st Guards Brigade
had not come up there was plenty of time for the men to dine before
resuming the advance. It was not until the Battalion reached the
Cambrai--Beauvois road and Igniel-dit-les-Frisettes that the enemy's
resistance stiffened, and it suffered casualties. Captain Adair with
No. 2 Company occupied Igniel, but reported that casualties were
occurring from machine-gun fire on his right, and from the enemy's
heavy guns at long range. This village was in a clump of trees on the
crest of a hill on the farther side of the Cambrai--Beauvois road,
and was approached by a sunken road, on each side of which the ground
rose in a gentle slope, and formed an ideal position for machine-guns.
Captain Adair advanced up the sunken road, and as soon as his company
appeared on the hill it was subjected to a harassing machine-gun fire.
He at first ordered his men to dig themselves in, but later he decided
to move up into Igniel-dit-les-Frisettes. When No. 2 Company moved into
the trees and buildings, it was so heavily shelled that Lord Lascelles,
who had come up to see how the situation was developing, told him his
men would be safer out in the open. There seems little doubt that the
German ammunition was already deteriorating, for when their shells
burst the pieces did not scatter so well as before. But for this the
casualties would certainly have been very heavy, and in all probability
it would have been found necessary to retire from the hill altogether.
At 4.30 P.M. Lord Lascelles received instructions to support
a cavalry patrol of the Oxfordshire Hussars, which had been sent out
through the 1st Battalion Coldstream on the left. He was surprised at
this message, for he knew that no cavalry patrol could possibly go out
in the face of this machine-gun fire, and when the officer commanding
the patrol appeared at the Battalion Headquarters to say that it had
been unable to go forward at all, he was able to disregard the order,
and send in a report asking for confirmation of his action. In the
evening orders were received to establish an outpost line with two
companies over the Cambrai--Beauvois road, with two companies in
support near Estourmel. That night a warning order was received for a
farther advance the next morning, and the Battalion Headquarters moved
up to Grand Chanfemel.

[Sidenote: Oct. 10.]

The next morning the 1st Battalion Scots Guards passed through the
outpost line, and continued the advance by bounds, while the Battalion
moved forward in support. No. 3 Company on the right, under Lieutenant
Anson, and No. 4, under Captain Bunbury, formed the support, with the
other two companies in reserve. In the afternoon the Scots Guards were
held up west of St. Hilaire, and were ordered to establish an outpost
line for the night. Nos. 3 and 4 Companies were placed under the orders
of the Officer Commanding the 1st Battalion Scots Guards, while two
companies of the 1st Battalion Coldstream were sent up to take their
place.

On the 11th the 1st Guards Brigade passed through the outpost line, and
continued the advance, while the Battalion went into very comfortable
billets in St. Hilaire, where the German baths were used. On the 13th
the 2nd Guards Brigade passed through with the 3rd Battalion Grenadiers
on the right, the 1st Battalion Coldstream on the left, and the 1st
Battalion Scots Guards in reserve. These Battalions were ordered to be
at immediate notice to move in case the 3rd Guards Brigade, which was
crossing the Selle River, should require assistance, but the warning
orders were later cancelled; and that night the Battalion relieved the
2nd Battalion Scots Guards in the front line along the Selle River.
Second Lieutenant Gunther with a patrol of eight men crossed the river,
and surprised a German whom he gagged and brought back. He reported
that the enemy seemed in a sleepy and disorganised state, and Lord
Lascelles accordingly asked for permission to push a company across the
river that night, but was told instead to establish a bridgehead on the
following night north of St. Python.

The erection of a bridgehead so near to so many houses was a matter
of some difficulty, since it was obvious that the crossing could not
be held if the enemy occupied houses within 300 yards of it. Lord
Lascelles therefore ordered Lieutenant H. I'B. Smith to occupy the
nearest house to the bridgehead and Lieutenant F. Donnison to search
the four or five houses near it and make sure they were empty. Second
Lieutenant Smith had no difficulty in occupying the house, but found
that the walls on the enemy's side were so full of large holes that the
house was untenable. Lieutenant Donnison moved forward to reconnoitre
but ran into the Germans in some force in the streets beyond, and was
forced by machine-gun fire and bombs to fall back on Lieutenant Smith's
party, leaving behind two men who were too badly wounded to move.

The alternatives open to Lord Lascelles were first, to hold the bridge
with trenches dug practically on it, but this was dismissed as being
strategically unsound; secondly, to dig trenches beyond the bridge,
which was difficult, because the men would have to be on the top of
the river bank, and overlooked by the houses 300 yards away; thirdly,
to occupy one house and strongly fortify it. This seemed at first to be
the best solution of the difficulty, but when Second Lieutenant Smith
and Second Lieutenant Donnison, who had behaved with great gallantry
and coolness, reported that it was impossible to hold the nearest
house, and that all the neighbouring houses would have to be cleared
of the enemy, Lord Lascelles came to the conclusion that this would
involve him in endless operations in the town. He therefore decided to
have the bridgehead dug in on the banks of the river.

Captain Bunbury, who commanded No. 4 Company, from which the two
platoons had been sent to secure the houses on the farther side of the
river, was placed in a difficult position. He brought up the remainder
of his company, and held a quarter of the village of St. Python, the
houses on the other side of the stream being held entirely by the
Germans. It was impossible to get to him in daylight, and by night all
the streets were swept with machine-gun fire. He handled his men under
circumstances of exceptional difficulty with some skill during the days
he was there. Throughout these operations some five hundred civilians
lived in the cellars and performed many acts of kindness to the men of
the Battalion who visited them. It was impossible for them to move out
of their retreat without being shot at. One little girl, eleven years
old, quite unconscious of the danger she ran, walked out in the
streets in broad daylight, and was brutally shot by a German; at great
risk one of the men of the Battalion went out and carried her back, but
she died.

  [Illustration:

  _Operations_

  _October 20th, 1918_

   _Emery Walker Ltd._
  ]

This was the beginning of the period when the Germans seemed to spare
all the buildings, and to concentrate their fire chiefly on the exits
from villages.

On the 16th the enemy was reported to be massing men on the St.
Python--Haussy road, and our artillery shelled the area indicated for
two hours, but no counter-attack developed. The following day the
Battalion was relieved, and went into billets at St. Vaast. On the 20th
the 1st and 3rd Guards Brigades attacked, and captured the high ground
east of Solesmes and St. Python, but the 2nd Guards Brigade was not
wanted. On the 22nd the whole of the Guards Division was taken out of
the line for a week's rest.




                             CHAPTER XXXV

                               NOVEMBER

                          _Diary of the War_


[Sidenote: Nov. 1918.]

The Versailles Conference opened. A mutiny among the German sailors
at Kiel broke out, and had far-reaching effects. In France the Allied
Armies continued to press forward, and the German retreat became more
rapid. In reply to overtures made by the Germans, the Allies replied
that if Germany wished for an armistice she must apply to General
Foch, in the usual military form, for the conditions under which an
armistice would be granted. On the 8th the German Envoys were received
by General Foch, and were given the conditions drawn up by the Allies.
A revolution broke out in Berlin, and the abdication of the Kaiser was
announced. On the 11th the Armistice was signed.

At the beginning of November Austria surrendered unconditionally.


                          THE GUARDS DIVISION

[Sidenote: The Guards Division.]

The advance in November, culminating in the capture of Maubeuge, was so
rapid, the extent of ground covered in so short a time so great, and
the number of prisoners and guns taken so large, that there was little
doubt that an Armistice on any conditions was the only thing that could
save the German army from absolute disaster.

The Guards Division moved up on the 2nd from Escarmain towards Villers
Pol. The objectives or bounds were no longer measured in yards but in
miles, and the ambitious programme produced by the Divisional Staff
would have been considered beyond the bounds of possibility, even six
months before.

It was known that the Germans must now stand and fight, if they were
to gain time for the withdrawal of their armies elsewhere, and a final
attack was ordered for November 4 in order to break through their
resistance, and complete the victory of the Allied Armies. Preparations
for the attack were somewhat disorganised by a partial withdrawal of
the enemy during the afternoon of the 3rd.

General Sergison-Brooke and General de Crespigny felt their way
forward, and Villers Pol was occupied during the night, but it was
impossible to notify the artillery of the exact position of the leading
companies by the time the attacks started on the 4th, and in order to
allow a margin of safety the barrage had to start some way east of the
village, with the result that some of our troops never caught it. Up to
mid-day the Germans fought very stubbornly, but they were everywhere
driven back, and by the evening Preux-au-Sart was in our hands, an
advance of nearly four miles. So fierce had been the fighting that
the losses on both sides were exceptionally heavy, the Germans in
particular leaving a large number of dead upon the ground.

During the two following days Heywood's Brigade drove back the enemy's
rear-guards another five miles, and patrols of the 1st Battalion
Welsh Guards entered Bavai, an important town, and the junction of no
less than eleven roads. Bavai was not on the front allotted to the
Guards Division, but during the whole of this advance the line on the
left of the Division was very much thrown back, which caused great
inconvenience, since it enabled the enemy to enfilade the troops from
the north, for the Germans were now prodigal in the expenditure of
shells, which they knew they could never carry away with them. The
troops billeted in villages in rear suffered considerably, and as
the left flank of the Division was thrown back the back areas were
all within easy range from the north. In particular the village of
Amfroipret was heavily punished, and General Heywood was severely
wounded by a shell, which exploded in his headquarters just west of
that village. Once more the 3rd Guards Brigade was without a commander.
Brigadier-General Campbell, V.C., was sent for to take command, and in
the meantime the Brigade was commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel Stirling,
Scots Guards.

On the 7th Sergison-Brooke's Brigade, passing through the 3rd Guards
Brigade, continued to drive the enemy back, but the following day
the advance was checked owing to enfilade fire from the north. That
afternoon a German orderly carrying an important message was captured.
The message was at once sent by special despatch rider to Divisional
Headquarters, and on being translated proved to be an urgent order
to the rear-guard commander, telling him to hold on to his present
position at all costs, and cover the withdrawal of the main body to a
line east of Maubeuge. The resistance of the rear-guard, the message
added, must be such as to gain time for the consolidation of this new
line and thus save the rest of the army. General Matheson at once
ordered General Sergison-Brooke to push forward his reserve Battalion
(the 3rd Battalion Grenadiers) directly it was dark, with instructions
to force its way through the enemy's rear-guard and straight on down
the road to Maubeuge.

The 3rd Battalion Grenadiers moved forward at 10 P.M., and
reached the citadel of Maubeuge at 2 A.M., but it was just
too late to cut off the enemy's rear-guard. De Crespigny's Brigade was
ordered to consolidate a line on the high ground east of the city;
this was many miles east of any point reached by the remainder of the
British Army. With the capture of Maubeuge the advance of the Guards
Division ended, and at 11 A.M. on the 11th the Armistice was
signed.

The final rapid advance had been made under circumstances of
exceptional difficulty, since the systematic destruction of the
railways by the Germans had necessitated the supply of ammunition and
rations being brought up by road. The country was closely intersected
by streams, and as all road bridges were destroyed, it was necessary
to erect temporary bridges with deviations through the fields leading
to them, while the original bridges were being repaired. Constant rain
and the continuous stream of transport soon turned these deviations
into a quagmire, through which the horses, often up to their bellies in
mud, had to pull their heavy load: only the persistent determination
of the transport officers and men to get through at all hazards, and
the fine condition of the horses made the task of supplying the troops
possible.

Even then these efforts would have been of no avail, but for the work
of the Royal Engineers in repairing the innumerable bridges to carry
lorry traffic: day and night, without rest and with scarcely time for
food, they worked, and never failed to do what was asked of them.

But the finest part of the advance, without which victory could not
have been enforced in 1918, was the dash and courage of the infantry
in face of the insidious knowledge that peace was within sight. Every
officer and man who went into those attacks in November knew that
it might be the last engagement of the war, and that if he avoided
unnecessary risk he would probably get through safely; if he took it,
he might be throwing away his life on the last day of the war. That
knowledge had not the smallest effect upon the conduct of the troops,
and the attack on November 4 was carried out with a dash and reckless
courage that had never been surpassed in the war.

The result cannot be over-estimated: instead of a half-hearted
Armistice with the Germans still under the impression they were,
as far as the army was concerned, virtually the victors, the last
attacks had shown them that it was merely a matter of estimating how
far their defeat had been completed, and had made them understand that
their safest course lay in bringing about an Armistice as speedily as
possible, to save the reputation of their army.


                           THE 1ST BATTALION

[Sidenote: 1st Batt.]

After ten days' rest spent in billets at St. Vaast the Battalion went
in pursuit of the retreating Germans, and marched to Escarmain, which
was being shelled by the enemy. On the 4th the 1st and 2nd Guards
Brigades attacked, while the 3rd Guards Brigade was in Divisional
Reserve. The Battalion moved by companies at 200-yards intervals to
Mortre Farm, where it bivouacked in the orchard, moving on again in the
afternoon to Villers Pol. Here orders were received that the Battalion
was to go through the 3rd Battalion Grenadier Guards and to continue
the advance.


           LIST OF OFFICERS WHO TOOK PART IN THE OPERATIONS
                         FROM NOVEMBER 4 TO 7

    Lieut.-Colonel the Hon. W. R. Bailey, D.S.O.  Commanding Officer.
    Major C. H. Greville, D.S.O.                  Second in Command.
    Lieut. J. A. Lloyd                            Acting Adjutant.
    2nd Lieut. J. C. Blunt                        Intelligence Officer.
    Capt. J. Teece, M.C.                          Quartermaster.
    Capt. P. M. Spence, M.C.                      King's Company.
    Lieut. R. G. Buchanan                            "      "
    2nd Lieut. A. D. Anderson                        "     "
    Lieut. C. G. Kennaway                         No. 2 Company.
    2nd Lieut. M. G. Farquharson                     "     "
    2nd Lieut. G. S. Lamont, D.S.O.                  "     "
    Lieut. R. S. Challands                        No. 3 Company.
    Lieut. W. A. Pembroke                            "     "
    2nd Lieut. N. P. Andrews                         "     "
    Lieut. H. Freeman-Greene                      No. 4 Company.
    2nd Lieut. L. F. A. d'Erlanger                   "     "
    2nd Lieut. C. A. Fitch                           "     "
    Capt. W. Lindsay, R.A.M.C.                    Medical Officer.
    Capt. the Rev. C. Venables                    Chaplain.

[Sidenote: Nov. 5.]

At 2.15 A.M. the Battalion moved out from Villers Pol with
intervals of thirty yards between platoons, and marched to La Buvette
cross-roads, where a halt was made, and the Lewis guns were taken
off the limbers. Directed by two guides from the 1st Battalion Scots
Guards, the Battalion made its way across country to a bridge, where
a long halt was made to find the Headquarters of the 3rd Battalion
Grenadiers--no easy matter in the dark. The Battalion eventually
managed to get into position close behind the front line posts. No.
2 Company, under Lieutenant Kennaway, was on the right and in touch
with the 2/20th London Regiment from the Sixty-second Division; No. 3
Company, under Lieutenant Challands, on the left in touch with the 2nd
Battalion Scots Guards; No. 4 Company, under Lieutenant Freeman-Greene,
was in support; and the King's Company, under Captain Spence, was in
reserve.

At 6 A.M. the advance began. Rain fell and continued
intermittently during the three days' operations. The advance was much
hampered, especially in the initial stages, by a creeping barrage
put down by the Sixty-second Division, without any warning having
been given to the Battalion. The going was very heavy, and the very
enclosed country, intersected by thick hedges and wire fences, made it
difficult for the companies to keep their directions. Little opposition
was encountered, until the leading platoons reached Amfroipret, when
one German officer and five men were taken prisoners in the village.
Immediately east of the village and in the wooded country south of the
railway, the Battalion began to encounter the enemy's rear-guard, but
after driving it in some way the advance came to a standstill about the
line of the road from Bout la Haut to Cambron Farm. The extraordinary
difficulty of locating a hidden enemy in such an enclosed country made
the advance hazardous, and the Germans appeared to be holding very
strongly with machine-guns a line some five hundred yards east of this
road. Lieutenant Kennaway, with No. 2 Company, attempted to secure the
cross-roads in front of him, and failed to make any headway against the
enemy's machine-guns. During this gallant attempt Lieutenant Lamont,
who was with the leading platoon, was killed, in addition to many men.

The situation was not without anxiety, for on neither flank could any
British troops be seen. It looked as if the Battalion had been going
on too fast for the rest of the line, and Lieutenant-Colonel Bailey
decided to wait until the situation on the right developed. No. 2
Company accordingly dug in where it was, and the King's Company was
moved to Cambron Farm to fill up the gap there was between the right
of the line and the Sixty-second Division. The situation on the left
required some adjustment, for the 2nd Battalion Scots Guards had been
apparently held up, and No. 3 Company had to be responsible for that
flank of the Battalion. About mid-day a company of the Scots Guards
came up through the village, and occupied Bermeries without opposition,
making the left flank once more secure. This enabled No. 4 Company
to push forward through the orchards and drive out an enemy's post,
but again the enemy's machine-guns prevented any farther advance. The
difficulties in this action were that, when once a company or platoon
had been sent off anywhere, it could not be found again owing to the
enclosed nature of the country. No communication between the various
parties was possible, and the operations therefore developed into small
isolated parties fighting independently of each other. The Germans
began to shell the village with heavy shell during the afternoon, and
the front line posts were fired on at close range by field artillery.
During the evening No. 3 Company took over the outpost line from No.
4 Company, which was withdrawn to cellars in the eastern end of the
village.

Lieut.-Colonel Bailey received orders for a farther advance next day,
and the King's and No. 2 Companies were to secure the cross-roads, if
possible during the night. It was, however, so dark, and the enemy was
in so great strength, that the operation was not attempted that night.
Brigadier-General Heywood, commanding the 3rd Guards Brigade, was
wounded in the evening, and the command devolved upon Lieut.-Colonel
Stirling, commanding the 2nd Scots Guards.

[Sidenote: Nov. 6.]

It poured with rain all night. The Battalion formed up south of the
railway on the line of the forward posts, with the King's Company,
under Captain Spence, on the right; No. 4 Company, under Lieutenant
Freeman-Greene, on the left; No. 3 Company, under Lieutenant Challands,
in support (their position north of the railway being taken over by
the Welsh Guards), and No. 2 Company, under Lieutenant Kennaway, in
reserve. The King's Company and No. 2 Company were ordered to make good
the line of the Bavai--Queve-au-loup road, where Nos. 2 and 3 Companies
would advance through them, and secure the last two objectives. The
King's and No. 4 Companies were comparatively fresh, as they had had
some hours' rest in barns and cellars during the night, but Nos. 2
and 3 Companies were soaked through by the rain, and tired out after
a hard day constantly on the move and a night spent in digging in on
the outpost line. At 6 A.M. the advance began, and was again
most difficult, on account of the enclosed country. The Battalion met
no opposition until it reached some high ground, when the leading
platoons came under a very heavy machine-gun fire from the far side
of the valley, and a harassing fire from field-guns. No. 4 Company
was temporarily checked, but the King's Company, under cover of the
houses and hedges along the Mecquignies road, seized the crossing over
the river, and worked up till it got in touch with a company from the
Sixty-second Division on the right. This advance through houses was
well carried out, and the Lewis gunners performed wonders in getting
their guns into houses. One party of German machine-gunners was shot
down in the church tower. No. 3 Company was halted on the road, and
No. 2 Company in reserve moved up to the cross-roads at Bavisiaux. The
grounds of Mecquignies Château were strongly held by machine-guns,
but after a sharp fight the King's Company drove out the enemy and
seized the Château. In this fighting Second Lieutenant A. D. Anderson
was killed, while gallantly leading his men to the attack. Lieutenant
Freeman-Greene, seeing the King's Company advance up the farther slope,
at once began to push on with No. 4 Company, and in spite of a hail of
machine-gun bullets reached the line of the river with little loss,
and gained touch with the left of the King's Company. After this the
fighting became very promiscuous, and platoons became scattered among
the orchards and fields of the Château. Touch was established with the
Welsh Guards, who had been temporarily checked in Buvigny, and who were
now moving on, and the enemy seemed to be retiring all along the line.
Lieut.-Colonel Bailey was ordered to push on and try and seize the
line on the Bavai road before night, and he accordingly moved up No. 2
Company to the Château grounds. The King's and No. 4 Companies had in
the meantime made good the high ground north of the Château, driving
out some advanced posts of the enemy. No. 3 Company was ordered to move
through Mecquignies village and to seize the orchards north-east of the
village. This it succeeded in doing, meeting with little opposition.
The King's and No. 4 Companies at once prolonged the line to the left,
and pushed out patrols to the east. This line was consolidated, and as
the night was very dark no farther advance was considered advisable.

The 466th German Regiment which opposed the advance fought extremely
well, and was cleverly handled by its commander, who thoroughly
understood how to fight a rear-guard action. The wet weather and the
mud made these operations peculiarly trying to men who had had little
training in close country fighting, but the discipline in the Battalion
was so good that each platoon, however isolated, could be relied on
to act intelligently. The scenes in the various villages were most
touching, for the civilians who emerged from cellars and underground
dug-outs all acclaimed the men as their deliverers, and were highly
excited in their joy.

[Sidenote: Nov. 7.]

Early on the 7th the 1st Battalion Scots Guards advanced through the
Battalion, which was withdrawn to Amfroipret. Lieut.-Colonel Bailey
issued the following message to the Company Commanders:

   Please let all ranks know that I consider the advance on the
   5th and 6th to have been carried out excellently in spite of
   very heavy going and the difficulties of keeping direction.
   On the 5th Nos. 2 and 3 Companies, though they had little
   fighting, had a thoroughly miserable and uncomfortable time,
   which as usual was borne with the greatest cheerfulness. The
   King's Company and No. 4 Company were better off, as they got
   a few hours' rest under cover.

   On the 6th, in spite of very heavy machine-gun fire from front
   and flank and most difficult country, the King's Company and
   No. 4 pushed ahead and drove in the rear troops of the enemy,
   thus making good the passage of the river Du Moulin de Bavai.
   The greatest credit is due not only to the fine fighting
   powers of the men but also to the good leading and forethought
   of the leaders.

   The two days' fighting were unsatisfactory as far as the
   killing of Germans was concerned, and the conditions miserable
   from the start to finish, but the Battalion, as always, went
   quicker and farther than any other Battalion in the Brigade,
   and the distance you went undoubtedly helped the 24th Division
   by threatening the communications of the enemy, holding the
   ground north-west of Bavai, and causing them to retire.
   You have well kept up the traditions of the Regiment and
   maintained the Grenadier spirit--the most magnificent in the
   world. I congratulate officers, non-commissioned officers, and
   men, and I know that you will never fail.

                                 W. R. BAILEY, Lieut.-Colonel,
                            Commanding 1st Battalion Grenadier Guards.

On the 9th the Battalion marched to La Longueville, and the 1st Guards
Brigade entered Maubeuge. On the following day it reached Douzies,
where the news arrived that the Armistice had been signed. On the
morning of the 11th the Battalion paraded, and the Commanding Officer
read out the official telegram declaring the Armistice to be in force.

  [Illustration: _Operations_

  _November 1-11, 1918_

   _Emery Walker Ltd._
  ]


[Sidenote: 2nd Batt.]

                           THE 2ND BATTALION

In the fighting on November 4 the following officers took part:

    Lieut.-Colonel C. F. A. Walker, M.C.      Commanding Officer.
    Capt. R. G. Briscoe, M.C.                 Adjutant.
    Lieut. L. Holbech, M.C.                   Intelligence Officer.
    Capt. L. St. L. Hermon-Hodge              No. 1 Company.
    2nd Lieut. D. L. King                        "     "
    Lieut. W. H. S. Dent                      No. 2 Company.
    2nd Lieut. C. J. N. Adams                    "     "
    Lieut. R. H. R. Palmer                    No. 3 Company.
    2nd Lieut. K. B. Bibby                       "     "
    2nd Lieut. E. G. Harcourt-Vernon             "     "
    Lieut. C. C. Cubitt                       No. 4 Company.
    2nd Lieut. B. R. Osborne                     "     "
    Lieut. E. L. Coffin                       Medical Officer.

[Sidenote: Nov. 4.]

The Battalion marched from Capelle through La Croisette and Villers
Pol to its assembly area, which was a line 100 yards east of the
Jenlain--Le Quesnoy road. Villers Pol was being heavily shelled at
the time, and a good number of casualties resulted. Lieut.-Colonel
Walker was ordered to advance in support of the 2nd Battalion
Coldstream Guards, until the capture of the first objective, the
Fresnay--Wargnies-le-Petit road, had been completed, then to pass
through and secure the second objective, a line some 3000 yards farther
east. Zero hour was fixed for 7.20 A.M. The rain ceased early,
but a very heavy mist hung low over the ground and made it impossible
for troops to see more than 200 yards ahead. No. 4 Company, under
Lieutenant Cubitt, was on the left of the line; No. 3 Company, under
Lieutenant Palmer, on the right; No. 2 Company, under Lieutenant Dent,
in support; and No. 1 Company, under Captain Hermon-Hodge, in reserve.

The 2nd Guards Brigade under Brigadier-General Sergison-Brooke went
forward on the right of the Battalion. Owing to mist the Coldstream
lost their direction, and proceeded at a right incline. Seeing troops
ahead moving along close to the barrage, the foremost companies of the
Battalion imagined that they were Coldstream Guards making for the
first objective. It was only discovered later that these were really
the Germans in retirement. As No. 4 Company passed over the high ground
near the wood south-west of Wargnies-le-Petit, the mist suddenly
lifted, and they came under heavy machine-gun fire from the north.
Lieutenant Cubitt was wounded, and the company had a considerable
number of casualties. Second Lieutenant Osborne, who now took command,
led two platoons a bit farther by short rushes, but was eventually
stopped by a sweeping machine-gun fire, which made farther progress
impossible. German field-guns were also firing at a short range, and
the Battalion lost a good many men. Lieutenant Osborne therefore took
it upon himself to make a personal reconnaissance of the enemy's
positions, and see whether there was not a better line of advance.
With almost reckless gallantry he went out, and carefully examined the
German line, but the result of his scrutiny was never known, as he was
shot through the heart by a machine-gun bullet on the way back. As No.
4 Company was now without an officer, Sergeant E. Carter took command.

[Sidenote: Nov. 5.]

Meanwhile No. 3 Company under Lieutenant Palmer had made its way
through the southern part of the wood near Wargnies-le-Petit. On
leaving the wood along the eastern edge, they came under machine-gun
and rifle fire from the enemy, who was barely 200 yards away.
Lieutenant Palmer advanced by short rushes, and not only took the
position, but captured or killed the whole garrison. It was found
impossible to proceed, and the company dug in a line of outposts.
During this attack the field-guns of the Guards Divisional Artillery
were brought up at a gallop to within a very short distance behind
the leading troops--a daring and difficult achievement that is worthy
of record. As soon as these guns opened fire on the village of
Wargnies-le-Petit, the companies on the left were able to continue
their progress. Touch was then gained with the 3rd Grenadier Guards
on the right, and with the Forty-second Division on the left. Nothing
more could be done that afternoon, and the Battalion consolidated its
position. Early on the morning of the 5th the 1st Battalion Irish
Guards passed through, and pursued the retreating Germans, who had
fallen back during the night. The Battalion moved up into billets in
Wargnies-le-Petit, and reorganised. Owing to casualties among officers
and men, Nos. 3 and 4 Companies were amalgamated into a composite
company under Lieutenant Palmer.

[Sidenote: Nov. 7.]

Two days later the Battalion moved on to Bavai. On the 9th it was in
Brigade Reserve, and supported the 2nd Guards Brigade in the advance on
Maubeuge. No. 1 Company was in support of the 2nd Battalion Coldstream
Guards, and No. 2 Company in support of the 1st Battalion Irish Guards,
taking the main Bavai--Maubeuge road as the centre of the Brigade
frontage. The composite company followed in support, ready to form a
defensive flank in either direction. There was no opposition, and at
5.30 the Battalion entered Douzies, and occupied the high ground east
of Maubeuge. The 2nd Battalion Coldstream Guards consolidated the
outpost line, with No. 1 Company forming a Brigade defensive flank. The
remainder of the Battalion was billeted at Port Allont. On entering
Maubeuge the troops had a great reception from the civilians in the
town.

On the 11th the cryptic news arrived:

   Hostilities will cease at 11 A.M. to-day.

The Armistice had been proclaimed.


                           THE 3RD BATTALION

[Sidenote: 3rd Batt.]

On November 2 the Battalion left St. Python, where it had been
billeted, and moved up to Capelle.

The following officers in the 3rd Battalion took part in the operations
from November 4 to 9:

    Lieut.-Colonel the Viscount Lascelles,
      D.S.O.                                      Commanding Officer.
    Lieut. G. M. Cornish, M.C.                    Adjutant.
    2nd Lieut. R. C. G. de Reuter                 Intelligence Officer.
    Lieut. K. A. Campbell, D.S.O.                 No. 1 Company.
    Lieut. C. C. Carstairs                           "     "
    2nd Lieut. G. R. Gunther                         "     "
    Capt. A. H. S. Adair, M.C.                    No. 2 Company.
    Lieut. S. G. Fairbairn, M.C.                     "     "
    2nd Lieut. A. E. F. F. Strangways-Rogers         "     "
    Capt. E. N. de Geijer, M.C.                   No. 3 Company.
    Lieut. F. Anson, M.C.                            "     "
    2nd Lieut. H. J. Gibbon, M.C.                    "     "
    Lieut. E. J. Bunbury, M.C.                    No. 4 Company.
    Lieut. G. W. Godman                              "     "
    Capt. J. Lawson, R.A.M.C.                     Medical Officer.
    Capt. the Rev. S. Phillimore                  Chaplain.

The Battalion moved off early to bivouac at Capelle. After slipping
and stumbling along a greasy chalk track, the companies reached their
positions, and were told to dig in. This order was easier to give than
to execute, for the men had only their light entrenching tools, which
were ill suited for excavating a flinty chalk ground. A few shells came
over to enliven the proceedings, but otherwise the day passed quietly.
On the following day orders were received for an attack by the Guards
Division, and battle stores were drawn.

[Sidenote: Nov. 4.]

On the 4th the Battalion started to take up its assembly positions in
rear of La Flaque Wood, and was much hampered on the approach march
by the crowded state of the roads and the congestion of traffic. On
reaching Villers Pol, it was forced to halt, as the bridge across
the Rhonelle had been destroyed, and the stream had to be crossed
by a single plank. During the crossing a few high-explosive and gas
shells were sent over, and the men had to put on their masks. Owing to
the dense fog the Company Commanders experienced some difficulty in
finding the way to the assembly positions, but fortunately they had
been provided with the large-scale aeroplane reconnaissance maps, and
were able to go unerringly by the shortest route. The attack was led
by the 1st Battalion Coldstream, which had the 1st Guards Brigade (2nd
Battalion Coldstream) on their left. The Battalion was to pass through
the 1st Battalion Coldstream Guards, whilst the 2nd Battalion Grenadier
Guards was to pass similarly through the 2nd Battalion Coldstream
Guards, and to continue the attack across a gully and on to the
villages and woods beyond. On the way No. 2 Company had some casualties
from shell-fire.

Though somewhat late on account of the fog, the Battalion started off
with No. 1 Company (under Lieutenant Campbell) on the right, and No.
2 Company (under Captain Adair) on the left, and advanced through
Flaque Wood. Passing through the leading Battalions they found the
2nd Battalion Coldstream had occupied the frontage of the 2nd Guards
Brigade, and throughout the day (as indeed throughout the whole
advance) units were apt to incline to the right, owing to the fact that
the enemy retirement was north-east, and the enemy units gave way more
readily opposite our right flank.

Lord Lascelles had issued orders that he would move Battalion
Headquarters to a sunken road, on the edge of the gully, two hours
after the leading companies were timed to pass that spot. The approach
of this road was shelled by a field-gun at short range, but fortunately
the arable ground, on which the shells fell, was so soft that one
of them bursting in the middle of Battalion Headquarters caused no
casualties.

On arriving at the road, the leading companies did not advance beyond
it, but at this moment the enemy were seen removing their gun, and a
patrol from each company was hurried forward, down the gully, whilst
Lewis guns were set to fire over their heads at the retiring gun.

On the far side of the gully an abandoned 5·9 was taken over by No.
1 Company, and on reaching the crest of the hill an enemy trench was
found defended by machine-guns. Whilst reconnoitring to organise his
attack, Captain Adair was wounded in the leg.

In the meanwhile the Sixty-second Division (on the right) had got well
forward, and the right of No. 1 Company was able to push on whilst the
left of No. 1 Company and the whole of No. 2 Company were held up.
Second Lieutenant A. E. F. F. Strangways-Rogers, reconnoitring along
the hedgerows on the right of No. 2 Company, was fatally wounded.

Lieutenant Campbell then organised an attack with his right platoon,
under a barrage of smoke-bombs, which, though they were badly handled
and burst innocuously in the air, so astonished the enemy that he
abandoned the key to his position, and withdrew down his trench to a
position in rear.

Farther on were some thick-set hedges, admirably adapted for a
rear-guard action, and on reaching them Lieutenant Carstairs found
there was only one gap sufficiently large to let one man through at a
time. He led the way, followed by his platoon, and immediately came
under fire from the left flank. While trying to locate the enemy, he
was severely wounded, and as there were no stretcher-bearers available
he had to lie where he was. Lieutenant Campbell on hearing this came
up, and seeing that the men were lying bunched up together, ordered
Lieutenant Gunther to straighten out the line, while he went to get a
platoon to reinforce his right flank. The Germans were unpleasantly
close, but their exact position had not yet been located. Lieutenant
Gunther, having carried out his orders, went out to where Lieutenant
Carstairs was lying on the ground, and was shot through the head.

Meanwhile the left of No. 2 Company was not in touch with the 2nd
Battalion Grenadier Guards, and the enemy was trying to creep round
that flank into the gully. Fortunately Lieut.-Colonel R. Bingham with a
section of the Guards Machine Gun Regiment was there, and had managed
by skilful sniping to hold them back. Lord Lascelles decided to bring
up No. 3 Company under Captain de Geijer to protect that flank, and
ordered the two leading companies to take advantage of the delay to eat
their rations.

During this delay the enemy opposite No. 2 Company, finding their
southern flank had been driven in, retired off the hill, and evacuated
the greater part of the village of Preux, which lay below. As soon as
his flank was secure, Captain Adair sent a platoon, under Lieutenant
Fairbairn, forward, and this platoon occupied the northern end of the
village without resistance. In No. 4 Company Lieutenant Godman was
wounded.

The enemy still held a trench in front of the southern end of the
village, but an attack launched by Lieutenant Campbell drove them out
of a position, which was really untenable when the houses in their rear
were held by us. They abandoned their machine-guns and their equipment.

There remained only a few detached houses at the southern end of the
village, with a trench in front of them, to complete the capture of the
line east of Preux, from which the following day's attack was to start.
This position was approached down an open slope, and the attacking
party was driven back, Lieutenant Campbell (the only officer left in
No. 1 Company), Sergeant Bennett, Sergeant Stevenson, and Sergeant
Valerio being wounded.

Lieutenant Campbell remained with his company, and organised a fresh
attack to take place at dusk, but left the execution of it to Company
Sergeant-Major Marks, who carried it out with great skill and resource.
He captured the trench but not the houses, and consolidated his
position.

Lord Lascelles ordered the attack on the houses to be postponed until
10 P.M., when it would be dark. This was accomplished without
difficulty, and the jumping-off line for the next day's attack was
completed. During the night Lieutenant F. Anson was sent to take
command of No. 1 Company.

The casualties among stretcher-bearers had been particularly heavy,
but Captain S. Phillimore did the work of four men in attending to the
wounded and relieving the medical officer of some of his work, which
owing to the shortage of stretcher-bearers was scattered all over the
field.

Captain Adair and Lieutenant Campbell were afterwards specially
mentioned by the Commanding Officer in his report of the operations,
not only on account of the skill and courage they displayed in handling
their companies, but also for their tenacity and courage in carrying on
their duties for some hours after they were wounded.

[Sidenote: Nov. 5.]

On the 5th the 3rd Guards Brigade passed through, and continued the
advance, while the Battalion remained behind at Preux, and was employed
on salvage work.

[Sidenote: Nov. 7.]

On the 7th the Battalion was placed, at the last moment, on the left
of the attack, but, owing to the state of the roads, it did not reach
the line from which it was to start for the attack, until twenty
minutes after the other Battalions had started. The enemy had, however,
retired, and the objectives were occupied without opposition. Since
the area allotted to the Battalion was in the Twenty-fourth Divisional
Area, the Battalion was relieved by the 9th Battalion East Surrey
Regiment, and went into support to the 2nd Guards Brigade at Audignies.

On the 8th the 2nd Guards Brigade was again ordered to continue the
attack. The Battalion, being in support, moved off at 6 A.M.,
but was forced to halt west of Longueville, where the bridge had been
demolished. After a bridge had been constructed by the Battalion the
limbers were pushed across at once, and the companies crossed without
difficulty. Billets in Malgarni were taken, until the news arrived that
no farther move forward was likely that day, when the Battalion moved
up north into Longueville. From despatches captured from the Germans
it was known that a general retirement had been ordered that night,
and the Brigadier asked Lord Lascelles whether his Battalion was fresh
enough to attempt the capture of Maubeuge that night. He answered
that it was, and the Battalion was ordered to advance along the main
Maubeuge road. It was a very dark night; and a straight high road,
often above the level of the surrounding fields, where the enemy might
still be lurking, was not the best route to take, but as rapidity was
the main point, Lord Lascelles moved the Battalion in advance-guard
formation straight down the road, instructing the companies to occupy
the ditches on either side of the road if attacked.

Although hampered by mine craters, the Battalion reached Maubeuge at 4
A.M., and occupied the town and citadel. It met no opposition,
but three German officers and 35 men were taken prisoners. So rapid was
our advance that Lieutenant Bunbury sent a platoon to capture a German
field-gun still in action. This platoon got within 150 yards of the gun
before it was taken away at a gallop. The only civilian Lord Lascelles
was able to find above ground in Maubeuge was a priest, who told him
that the enemy had all retired a few hours before the Grenadiers
arrived, which confirmed the information extracted from the German
despatches. The inhabitants came out in the morning, and welcomed the
Battalion with the greatest enthusiasm.

On the 11th the cessation of hostilities was announced, and the
Battalion attended a thanksgiving service.




                             CHAPTER XXXVI

                 THE MARCH OF THE GUARDS DIVISION INTO
                     GERMANY, AND THE RETURN HOME


[Sidenote: The Guards Division 1918.]

After an impressive thanksgiving service at Maubeuge, the march into
Germany began, and the Guards Division moved by stages to Cologne.
The weather broke, and on several days the men were soaked before
they reached their billets in the evening. At first the advent of the
British troops was hailed with enthusiasm by the inhabitants of the
towns and villages, and the people on whom the men were billeted vied
with each other to make things as comfortable as possible for their
visitors. Flowers were thrown at the men, speeches were made, and
cheering crowds of peasants greeted the Battalions as they arrived, but
as the march continued, and they reached the Flemish part of Belgium
this good feeling changed to one of apathy, bordering at times on
incivility. The people of this district had been untouched by the war,
and regarded the mass of troops who swarmed into their houses as an
intolerable affliction.

When the British troops arrived at the frontier of Germany, they
supposed that the march would be continued through a hostile
population, but so far was this from the truth, that the people of
Germany cringed before the British soldier, and seemed only surprised
at the considerate manner in which they were being treated. Whether the
Germans expected to be as brutally treated as the Belgians had been
by their own soldiers, or whether they were under the impression that
their conduct would in some way affect the peace terms it is difficult
to say; but the fact remains that the British troops received nothing
but kindness at the hands of the inhabitants. In some of the towns that
were passed through, the inhabitants did not appear to grasp the fact
that they belonged to a conquered nation, and that the best they could
do was to remove their hats respectfully, as the Commanding Officers
rode past at the head of their Battalions, but the escorts had much
pleasure in teaching them manners, by knocking off their hats and caps
as they passed.

The routes taken by the four Battalions were as follows:


[Sidenote: 1st Batt.]

                           THE 1ST BATTALION

    Nov.  18.  Left Maubeuge.
               To Villers Sire Nicole.
     "    19.   " Binche.
     "    20.   " Marchienne-au-Pont.
     "    24.   " Châtelet.
     "    25.   " Fosse.
     "    28.   " Naninne.
     "    29.   " Sur Huy.
    Dec.   5.   " Modave.
     "     6.   " Ocquier.
     "    10.   " Grimonster.
     "    11.   " Lierneux.
     "    12.   " Rodt.
     "    13.   " Büllingen.
     "    14.   " Oberhausen.
     "    15.   " Sötenich.
     "    16.   " Schwerfen.
     "    17.   " Lechenich.
     "    18.   " Efferen.
     "    20.   " Cologne.


[Sidenote: 2nd Batt.]

                           THE 2ND BATTALION

    Nov.  18.  Left Maubeuge.
               To Estinne-au-Mont.
     "    19.   " Anderlues.
     "    20.   " Montignies-sur-Sambre.
     "    24.   " Bambois.
     "    28.   " Assesse.
    Dec.   5.   " Verlée.
     "     6.   " Aisne.
     "     7.   " Arbrefontaine.
     "    11.   " Born.
     "    12.   " Mürringen.
     "    13.   " Oberhausen.
     "    15.   " Sinzenich.
     "    16.   " Lechenich.
     "    17.   " Efferen.
     "    18.   " Widdersdorf.
     "    20.   " Ehrenfeld (Cologne).


[Sidenote: 3rd Batt.]

                           THE 3RD BATTALION

    Nov.  18.  Left Maubeuge.
               To Rouvcroy.
     "    19.   " Mont St. Geneviève.
     "    20.   " Charleroi.
     "    24.   " Presles.
     "    25.   " Lesves.
     "    28.   " Maillen.
    Dec.   5.   " Havelange
     "     6.   " Barvaux.
     "     7.   " Werbomont.
     "    10.   " Wanne.
     "    12.   " Deidenburg.
     "    13.   " Nidrum.
     "    14.   " Weywertz.
     "    15.   " Ehrenfeld (by train).


[Sidenote: 4th Batt.]

                           THE 4TH BATTALION

    Nov.  17.  Joined Guards Division.
     "    19.  To Binche.
     "    20.   " Marchienne-au-Pont.
     "    24.   " Châtelet.
     "    25.   " Sart St. Laurent.
     "    28.   " Dave.
     "    29.   " Brionsart.
    Dec.   5.   " Pont de Bonne (Modave).
     "     6.   " Houmart.
     "    10.   " Ferrières.
     "    11.   " Lierneux.
     "    12.   " Blanche Fontaine.
     "    13.   " Büllingen.
     "    14.   " Blumenthal.
     "    15.   " Scheven.
     "    16.   " Kommern.
     "    17.   " Friesheim.
     "    18.   " Efferen.
     "    20.   " Kriel (Cologne).

[Sidenote: The Guards Division.]

Cologne, it was feared, might be difficult to manage, for, although
the country people had submissively borne the mass of British troops
inflicted upon them, it seemed probable that the inhabitants of a large
town like Cologne would resent the occupation. The disorderly elements
might take advantage of the arrival of troops, belonging to their most
hated enemy, to make a hostile demonstration, and even to shoot. But
here again a surprise awaited our men, for the greater portion of the
inhabitants hailed the Battalions, as the only means of escape from
anarchy. The British military authorities found that the population
readily submitted to the most stringent measures, that were considered
necessary for the maintenance of order.

The life at Cologne was on the whole pleasant, but after a short time
monotonous. After the novelty of playing the part of conquerors in a
German town had worn off, the men naturally wished to go home. The
only event that is worth chronicling was the arrival of the colours
of each Battalion in January. Colour parties consisting of picked
officers and N.C.O.'s were despatched to London to bring them out:
in the 1st Battalion Lieutenant J. A. Lloyd and Second Lieutenant M.
G. Farquharson, M.C.; in the 2nd Battalion Lieutenant W. H. S. Dent,
M.C., and Lieutenant L. Holbech, D.S.O., M.C.; and in the 3rd Battalion
Lieutenant K. A. Campbell, D.S.O., and Second Lieutenant E. L. F.
Clough-Taylor.

The 4th Battalion, having been specially raised during the war, had
no colours, and was presented with a Union Colour by Major H.R.H. The
Prince of Wales. The ceremony took place on the 14th of January, and in
presenting the colour His Royal Highness said:

   Colonel Pilcher, Officers, Warrant Officers, Non-Commissioned
   Officers, and Men of the 4th Battalion Grenadier Guards--The
   King, the Colonel-in-Chief of the Regiment, has commanded me
   to entrust to your safe-keeping this colour which His Majesty
   has presented to you in recognition of your gallantry. Less
   than three months after your formation you were fighting at
   Loos. At once you showed how completely you had absorbed
   the great traditions of the First or Grenadier Regiment of
   Foot Guards. You added fresh laurels to your record in the
   great attacks of the Guards Division in the battle of the
   Somme in September 1916. In the advance on Passchendaele in
   1917, and later in the year at Cambrai, you still further
   enhanced your fighting reputation. Your historic stand in
   front of Hazebrouck in April last year earned your Battalion
   its second V.C., and was largely responsible for checking the
   enemy's advance. It is a special pleasure to me to hand you
   this colour in the hour of victory, having like yourselves
   the honour of serving in this our great regiment. May it be
   a perpetual reminder to you of the honour you have won for
   yourselves and for the whole regiment in this war.

Colonel Pilcher replied as follows:

   Your Royal Highness--On behalf of the Officers, Warrant
   Officers, Non-Commissioned Officers, and Men of the 4th
   Battalion Grenadier Guards, I beg to thank you for the
   generous words you have addressed to the Battalion under my
   command in presenting this colour, the gift of His Majesty,
   the Colonel-in-Chief of the Regiment.

   This gracious mark of His Majesty's recognition of the
   services of the Battalion during the war is most deeply
   appreciated by all ranks who are in Your Royal Highness's
   presence amongst us here to-day on enemy soil--a memorable
   symbol of the completeness of the victory of our arms.

   In thanking Your Royal Highness for coming here to-day, may I
   request you to beg His Majesty the King, the Colonel-in-Chief
   of the Regiment, to accept the grateful and loyal thanks of
   the 4th Battalion Grenadier Guards.

In February orders for the Guards Division to return home were
received, and one by one the Battalions went to Dunkirk, where they
embarked for England. The 2nd Battalion was the first to reach London,
and its reception by the crowd, assembled to welcome the men home, was
most enthusiastic.

On March 22 all the Battalions had a great ovation when they marched
past the King at Buckingham Palace, and afterwards went on to the
Mansion House. Though it was a bitterly cold day, thousands of people
thronged the streets, and filled the windows and house-tops to cheer
the men as they passed. Demobilised officers and men in plain clothes
followed their battalions, and all the wounded who were able to march
joined the procession, while lorries were provided for those who had
lost a leg or who were too badly wounded to march. Even the blind
joined in, and marched with men to guide them. The Household Cavalry
came first, and were followed by the Battalions of the Guards Division,
headed by Lieut.-General the Earl of Cavan and his Staff. Amongst them
rode the Prince of Wales, who was greeted with the greatest enthusiasm
as he passed. Major-General Feilding and his Staff also rode past,
in addition to many Brigadier-Generals, who had commanded one of
the Guards Brigades, while officers, who had been in command of the
Battalion at any period during the war, rode alongside the officer
actually in command.

Representatives of the Artillery with guns, the Engineers with
pontoons, the Army Medical Corps, and Army Service Corps, who had
been attached to the Guards Division in France, all took part in the
procession. In the City the crowds were, if possible, denser and more
enthusiastic than in the West End, and the scene at the Guildhall
was a sight that no one will forget. After marching through the City
the procession returned to the West End, and some battalions went to
barracks, while others, not quartered in London, proceeded to the
railway station.

After the march every man was handed the following message from the
King, bearing a facsimile of His Majesty's signature:

                                          BUCKINGHAM PALACE.

   Officers, Non-Commissioned Officers, and Men of the Guards
   Division--It is with pride and satisfaction that I take the
   Salute of the Guards Division on this memorable occasion
   of their triumphal march through London, and on the same
   spot where Queen Victoria in July 1856 welcomed back three
   battalions of Guards from the Crimea.

   The Guards Division, first formed in 1915, practically served
   in every sector in the Western Front, and my visits to the
   British Armies in the field gave me opportunities of seeing
   the battle grounds on which it has made so great and enduring
   a name.

   The Division, which commenced its brilliant career at Loos,
   took a prominent part in 1916 in the hard fighting on the
   Somme, when on two occasions three Battalions of the same
   regiment were in the line together.

   At the third battle of Ypres the Division responded to the
   call of its Commander by capturing all allotted objectives in
   three separate attacks.

   The fighting round Cambrai, and the historical counter-attack
   which broke up a dangerous German thrust at Gouzeaucourt, will
   ever be remembered.

   During the critical days of 1918 an heroic resistance was
   offered to the vigorous assaults of an enemy numerically
   stronger and elated by success, while during our subsequent
   rapid advance the efforts of the Division were crowned by the
   capture of Maubeuge, the flag of which is carried on parade
   to-day, a grateful tribute from its citizens.

   Nor do I forget the other Arms which enabled the three
   Brigades of Guards for the first time in the history of the
   British Army to fight as a Division. The Guards Division Royal
   Artillery, composed of the 74th and 75th Brigades of Field
   Artillery; the Guards Division Royal Engineers, formed of
   the 55th, 75th, and 76th Field Companies; the 3rd, 4th, and
   9th Field Ambulances, constituting the Guards Division Field
   Ambulance, and the Guards Division Train and Supply Column.

   All these, inspired by the best traditions of their respective
   regiments and corps, fostered the invincible spirit and dogged
   determination of a Division which knew no defeat.

   Now, after three and a half years of close co-operation in the
   field, through the ever-changing fortunes of war, the units of
   the Guards Division are about to separate.

   As your Colonel-in-Chief I wish to thank you one and all for
   faithful and devoted services, and to bid you God-speed. May
   you ever retain the same mutual feelings of true comradeship
   which animated and ennobled the life of the Guards Division.

                         (Signed)              GEORGE R.I.

   _March_ 22, 1919.




                            CHAPTER XXXVII

                THE 7TH (GUARDS) ENTRENCHING BATTALION


[Sidenote: Entrenching Battalion. 1915-18.]

The enormous amount of spade work, required for the long and intricate
network of trenches, rendered some measures necessary for supplementing
the work, usually done by the fighting forces; and thus entrenching
battalions were formed, composed of drafts for the front, awaiting
absorption in their respective units; but the system of detaching
men from Battalions of Guards and sending them to fill any vacancies
that might occur in one of the entrenching battalions was not at all
satisfactory. In the first place, to allow men on arrival in France at
once to go to an entrenching battalion, where the discipline was more
lax, and the habits and customs different from those which obtained
in the regiments of Guards was a measure hardly calculated to improve
them as fighting men. And in the second place, it was contrary to the
regulations for men of the Guards to be commanded by any but their own
officers.

  [Illustration:

    _Frederic Robinson. Camberley. photographer      Emery Walker ph. sc._

  _Brigadier-General A.F.A.N. Thorne, D.S.O._
  ]

The idea of forming a Guards Entrenching Battalion seems to have come
from certain officers at the base. Shortly before the arrival of the
new battalions of the Guards in France, rumours were afloat that an
entrenching battalion for the Guards Division was about to be formed.
Captain Viscount Lascelles wrote a letter to the effect that a platoon
from the reinforcements of every battalion of Guards was to be diverted
to an entrenching battalion. The platoon from the 2nd Battalion
Grenadiers had already been told off, and was to be commanded by an
officer of the Connaught Rangers, while the Battalion itself was to be
placed under a cavalry captain. Captain Viscount Lascelles deplored
the fact that there was no one of sufficient seniority at the base, to
combat these proposals, and thought the whole matter should be referred
to the Lieutenant-Colonel rather than let it lapse, on the judgment of
half a dozen ensigns at the base.

Nothing, however, appears to have been done until November, when a
Guards Entrenching Battalion was formed, and Major E. C. Ellice,
Grenadier Guards, was sent out to take command. He arrived at Chipilly
on the Somme, about five miles from Bray, on December 1, 1915, and took
over the Battalion from Major Clutterbuck, who had been temporarily in
command. The Battalion consisted of 230 Grenadiers, 300 Coldstream, 250
Scots Guards, and 200 Irish Guards, with 40 tunnellers from the Royal
Engineers.

Major Ellice, having made the acquaintance of his new Battalion,
appointed Lieutenant Ian Bullough, Coldstream Guards, to be Adjutant,
while Captain Jones, who had hitherto occupied that post, became
Quartermaster. The Battalion was divided up into four companies: No.
1 Company Grenadiers under Captain M. Lloyd, No. 2 Coldstream under
Lieutenant Viand, No. 3 Scots Guards under Lieutenant Maitland, and
No. 4 Irish Guards under Lieutenant Hanbury. The billets in which the
men lived were not only uncomfortable but also extremely inconvenient,
being sometimes over a mile apart, and so cramped were the men for room
that pigsties even were made use of to house them: it was therefore
with pleasure that Major Ellice received instructions to move the
men to Wood Camp, which was no paradise, but still preferable to the
pigsties, and much nearer the trenches. An old stone quarry, worked by
a gang of twelve quarry-men under a Lieutenant in the Royal Engineers,
provided the material for draining the camp and improving the roads.
Water carts were obtained to provide sufficient water for cooking
parties, and fatigue parties were sent every evening to draw water for
other purposes from the Somme.

The great advantage of an entrenching battalion was quickly seen by the
rest of the Army, since the battalions that came out of the front line
were relieved of working during their rest. It had formerly been the
custom for resting battalions to dig reserve lines, but now this duty
was taken over by the entrenching battalion. All reserve trenches were
made by it; emplacements for field-guns, howitzers, and machine-guns
constructed, brushwood cut for revetting, roads repaired, carrying
parties for all materials necessary for trench warfare supplied.

The staff of the Battalion was kept as permanent as possible, but the
Battalion itself was used as a stepping-stone from the base battalion
to the Battalions in the front line. The training the officers received
was invaluable, as it accustomed them to shell-fire. One or two shells
invariably fell near the working-parties; sometimes as many as thirty
to forty shells would explode in the neighbourhood. This showed the
officers that the effect was local, unless the shell happened to strike
a hard surface. It gave them confidence, and they gradually became used
to unaimed shell-fire.

At the end of December 1915 Captain Bullough was ordered to join his
Battalion, and Captain M. K. A. Lloyd, Grenadier Guards, succeeded him
as Adjutant.

[Sidenote: 1916.]

In January 1916 the Entrenching Battalion was employed on the
second-line trenches, and in constructing gun emplacements for the
artillery. This latter duty involved technical knowledge on the part
of the officers, who had to work from plans supplied to them by the
gunners. About this time it was found that the Amiens--Somme Canal
afforded better means of transport for rations and road-making material
than the lorries, which had hitherto been used for that purpose; and
it was necessary to make a light railway across some marshy ground
between Bray road and the Canal. The Entrenching Battalion was employed
in making 3000 fascines for this purpose, and the men became so expert
at their work that there was keen competition between the various
companies as to which should turn out the most fascines.

In April 1916 preparations for the offensive operations on the Somme
were begun, and the Entrenching Battalion played a great part during
this battle, which lasted six months. The Guards Division was not
employed in the initial stages of the battle, and it was therefore not
until July that the Entrenching Battalion moved up to the vicinity
of Fricourt, to take over the forward roads in the battle area. The
constant shelling, combined with the heavy traffic, made it peculiarly
difficult to keep the roads in sufficiently good repair for constant
use, but in spite of all difficulties the roads were kept open all
the time, and this was entirely due to the ability and energy of the
officers and the efficiency and discipline of the men. Throughout the
year the duties of the Entrenching Battalion were many and various,
and at times the work was very heavy, but it was always cheerfully
undertaken, because the men prided themselves on being part of the
Guards Division, and knew that more than the average amount of work
done by the other entrenching battalions was expected from them.

[Sidenote: 1917.]

In January 1917 the Battalion was employed in strengthening the
defences of Ginchy and Combles, and in the successful operations
against the Germans early that year it participated in the various
works, on which all arms were engaged. In April it was encamped for
some months in the neighbourhood of Havrincourt Wood, and was employed
in preparations for the offensive in the direction of Cambrai, which,
however, did not take place till November. In June the Battalion
made a farther move to Roisel, where for some months it was busily
employed in digging a line of trenches some nine miles long, from
Epeley to within three miles of St. Quentin. The strength of the
Battalion had now risen to over 2000 men. The work on these trenches
was very interesting, as it was in sight of the Hindenburg line, and
although works of some importance were undertaken, Major Ellice and his
Entrenching Battalion were given complete charge of this area.

Although the Guards Entrenching Battalion had constantly worked in
the forward areas, the other entrenching battalions had been employed
mostly in rear on work which could as easily have been done by labour
battalions or Chinese, and they had consequently diminished in
strength. In September 1917 the attention of the military authorities
was directed to these entrenching battalions, with the result that it
was decided to disband them. General Feilding asked that the Guards
Entrenching Battalion might be maintained, but this was not considered
possible. In October the final disbandment took place.




                            CHAPTER XXXVIII

                         THE RESERVE BATTALION


[Sidenote: Reserve Battalion. 1914-18.]

The Reserve Battalion, originally known as the 4th Battalion, sprang
into existence at the School of Mines at the London University at
Kensington as soon as war was declared in 1914. Within five days one
thousand seven hundred reservists had arrived from all parts of England
and Wales, and retired officers appeared on the scene, whether they
belonged to the Reserve or not. This mass of men had to be converted
into a disciplined Battalion, non-commissioned officers appointed, and
the whole machinery of a battalion created. Yet so smoothly did the
mobilisation work that within a few days every man was fully equipped,
and companies were drilling in the Park, with N.C.O.'s shouting out
their drill as if they had never been away.

Lieut.-Colonel G. D. White was appointed Commanding Officer, Major G.
W. Duberly Second-in-Command, Captain E. N. E. M. Vaughan, Adjutant,
and Lieutenant J. C. Rolinson, Quartermaster.

The whole conditions of service were now different. Instead of the
usual apathy on the part of the men to learn anything new, they now
eagerly seized every occasion to acquire knowledge. The Army was no
longer a profession, where a man could reduce to a science the practice
of doing the least possible amount of work without getting into
trouble. It was now a matter of life and death. The latest developments
of modern warfare had to be learnt quickly, and the men, who were
already seasoned soldiers, set to work with a will to learn from
officers and N.C.O.'s at first as ignorant as themselves, the new drill
and the latest method of attack and defence. By the time the Reserve
Battalion moved to Chelsea Barracks, about three weeks later, it had
already become a serviceable body of men. A large number of N.C.O.'s
and old soldiers, mostly "D" section reserve, were selected and sent as
instructors to train the new battalions of "Kitchener's Army." Nearly
all proved excellent instructors, and many privates rose almost at once
to be sergeants and even warrant officers. In the early days of the
war the National Guard and Volunteers did not exist, and consequently
the duty of finding guards to protect the reservoirs, electric power
stations, and other vulnerable points, devolved on the regular troops
in London. The number of small guards all over London was so great that
it took the field officer, whose duty it was to visit them, over five
hours in a motor to go his rounds. About October 1914 the majority of
these guards were taken over by the Special Home Service Units.

Soon the heavy casualties incurred by the battalions in France made the
sending of large drafts necessary, and the Reserve Battalion began to
change completely, with new officers and new men constantly arriving
from Caterham. The number of men in the Battalion became so great that
there were two thousand five hundred men in barracks, and the problem
of accommodation was a very difficult one. Early in 1915, Aylwin huts
were erected at Burton's Court, which somewhat relieved the pressure.
On the formation of the Welsh Guards in February 1915, five officers
and six hundred and thirty-four other ranks were transferred to this
new regiment, and in July of the same year, when it was decided to form
another battalion of the Grenadier Guards from the Reserve Battalion,
the latter automatically became the 5th Battalion.

The officers at that time were as follows:

    _In Command_--

        Lieut.-Colonel G. D. White

    _Major_--

        Du Plat Taylor, G. P.

    _Captains_--

        Stewart, E. O.
        Ellice, E. C.
        Macdonald, G. G.
        Taylor, E. R.
        Halford, C. H.
        Webster, Sir A. F. W. E., Bart.
        Lethbridge, Sir W. P. C., Bart.
        Coventry, St. J. H.
        Glyn, A. St. L.
        Loftus, D. F.
        Vaughan, E. N. E. M.
        Lygon, Hon. R., M.V.O.
        Cary, Hon. L. P.
        Needham, Hon. F. E.

    _Lieutenants_--

        Stewart, W. A. L.
        Harcourt-Vernon, G. C. FitzH.
        Cecil, A. W. J.
        Ward, E. S.
        Stanhope, Hon. R. P.
        Pearson-Gregory, P. J. S.
        Kenyon-Slaney, R. O. R.
        Sitwell, F. O. S.
        Williams, M.
        Graham, H. A. R.
        Duckworth-King, Sir G. H. J., Bart.
        St. Aubyn, F. C.
        Mildmay, A. S. L. St. J.
        Westmacott, G. R.
        Cary, Hon. P. P.
        Parker-Jervis, T.
        Rumbold, H. C. L.
        Eyre, J. B.
        Asquith, R.
        Walker, P. M.

    _Second Lieutenants_--

        Llewelyn, H.
        Loftus, F. P.
        Crosland, C.
        Yorke, Hon. A. E. F.
        Charteris, Hon. I. A.
        Sloane-Stanley, G. C.
        Sloane-Stanley, H. H.
        Miller, E. E.
        Combe, T. A.
        Parker, R. W.
        Chapman, M.
        North, J. B.
        Farquhar, R.
        Joicey-Cecil, J. F. J.
        Bonham-Carter, F. G.
        Manners, the Hon. F. H.
        Alexander, H.
        Gordon-Lennox, V. C. H.
        Irvine, A. F.
        Nairn, E. W.
        Kendall, R. Y. T.
        Worsley, J. F.
        Hopley, F. J. V. B.
        Benyon, J. W. A.

    _Adjutant_--

        Hon. L. P. Cary.

    _Quartermaster_--

        Rolinson, J.

In February 1916 Lieut.-Colonel G. D. White left to take up a Staff
appointment in France, and was succeeded by Lieut.-Colonel G. C.
Hamilton, D.S.O. From January 1916 until the end of the war, the
Battalion was organised on a nine-company basis in the following
manner: the first four companies were composed of recruits who were
being trained to feed the Battalions at the front. No. 5 Company
consisted of men employed on various duties, and the remaining four
companies, six to nine, comprised sick and wounded men from France.

On May 29, 1916, Lieut.-General Sir Francis Lloyd, commanding the
London Districts, inspected the Battalion, and expressed himself much
pleased with its appearance on parade. General Sir George Higginson
also paid a visit to the Battalion that year, and both officers and
men much appreciated this attention from a veteran Grenadier, who
had fought in the Crimean War. In September a duty, somewhat out of
the ordinary routine, was assigned to the Reserve Battalion. During
an air raid over London, one of the German Zeppelins was brought
down in flames in Essex, and the Battalion was ordered to provide
a guard over what was left of it during the two following days.
In December Lieut.-Colonel Hamilton was given command of the 4th
Battalion in France, and was succeeded by Lieut.-Colonel Lord Francis
Montagu-Douglas-Scott, D.S.O.

Nothing of interest occurred until 1918, when, owing to the large
numbers of men who joined in consequence of the protected trades being
brought under the Military Enlistment Act, a Provisional Battalion was
formed at Tadworth. This Battalion, under the command of Lieut.-Colonel
Maitland, D.S.O., proceeded to Aldershot four companies strong,
leaving behind two companies under Captain Lord Forbes. A month later
Lieut.-Colonel Maitland was succeeded by Lieut.-Colonel G. E. C. Rasch.
Throughout the war the Reserve Battalion found the public duties in
London, and on several occasions provided guards of honour, notably at
the funeral of Field-Marshal Earl Roberts at St. Paul's Cathedral on
November 19, 1914.

Field training was carried out by one company at a time at Basildon
Park, lent by Captain J. A. Morrison, during the autumn of 1914, and at
Bovingdon Green Camp, Marlow, during the summer of 1915, and after that
at Tadworth Camp. In addition, there were specialist courses: bombing
at Southfields and Godstone, Musketry at Rainham and Hythe, Machine
Gun courses and Gas Instruction at Chelsea.

The arduous and somewhat thankless task of continually training men as
quickly as possible, to feed the battalions in France, was successfully
carried on during the four years of the war, and letters from the
four Commanding Officers bear ample testimony to the efficiency of
the Battalion organisation. The greater part of the work fell on the
Commanding Officer, Adjutant, and the senior Captains, whose untiring
efforts will ever be gratefully remembered by the regiment. Day in and
day out, during four long years, these officers strived to maintain
with each draft the high standard of the regiment, and this result
could not have been effected without the invaluable assistance of the
warrant officers and sergeants.




                             CHAPTER XXXIX

                               THE BAND


[Sidenote: The Band. 1914-18.]

In the first year of the war it does not appear to have occurred to
any one that the Battalions at the front would wish to have a band,
but when the Guards Division was formed in 1915 the lack of music was
much felt, and it was decided that the regimental bands of the five
Guards Regiments should be sent out in turn. The Grenadier Guards Band
was naturally sent out for the first tour of duty at the front, and
was therefore fortunate enough to earn the distinction of being the
only band that received the 1914-1915 Star. It embarked on October 22,
with Captain A. Williams in command, and proceeded to France. While
in mid-Channel, the ship on which it crossed over collided with a
four-masted Norwegian vessel, and sank her. A thorough search was made
in the darkness for any survivors, and eventually nine of the Norwegian
crew were picked up. The British ship itself was badly damaged, and
for some hours there was great uncertainty whether it would ever reach
port, but it eventually arrived at Havre some six hours overdue.

On arrival the band at once proceeded to Harfleur, which it reached
in time to play the National Anthem, when the King, on one of his
periodical visits, inspected the Guards depot. Later it moved up to
Sailly-la-Bourse, and was warmly welcomed by all ranks of the Guards
Division. Captain Williams at once set to work to organise concerts,
and to make arrangements to play at each Battalion Headquarters. Two
and even three performances were given daily, and visits were paid to
the troops in rest billets and in the clearing stations. The people of
Paris, anxious to take advantage of the presence of this famous band in
France, invited Captain Williams to give a concert at the Hippodrome in
aid of the French Red Cross. This proved to be a remarkably successful
performance, and a sum of no less than £650 was raised. In January 1916
the band was relieved by the Coldstream band, and returned to London.

A second tour of duty in France was undertaken in 1917, when the Guards
Division was on the Somme, and three months were spent at Mericourt
l'Abbé.

A third visit to the front took place in August 1918, just at the time
when the German last effort had spent itself, and the Allied Armies
were making a general advance. On the night of August 21, when the
Guards Division was commencing its advance, the Germans bombed the
whole area in which it was throughout the entire night. Among the many
casualties were three Grenadier bandsmen, and although none of their
wounds proved fatal, the solo clarinettist, a very fine musician, lost
his arm, and thereby his livelihood.

In July 1918 the band attended the French Fêtes in Paris, and remained
there for the celebration of the Belgian Independence. This function
took place in the grounds at Versailles, and was attended by the
principal bands of Great Britain, France, America, and Belgium. On
another occasion in August 1918 the band played in the Tuileries
Gardens in Paris in aid of the American Red Cross Society.




                              CHAPTER XL

                   REGIMENTAL FUNDS AND ASSOCIATIONS


[Sidenote: Regimental Funds and Associations.]

"Grenadiers look after themselves" has become an accepted axiom
not only in war but also in peace time. A short time before the
commencement of the war the Old Comrades Association was instituted
under the auspices of Colonel Scott-Kerr, who commanded the Regiment
at that time, and its object was to ensure that no Grenadier after he
had left the Regiment was ever in want. This Association proved a great
success, and although two years' service was a necessary qualification
for membership, the officers, non-commissioned officers, and men who
joined soon rose to a considerable number.

Another tradition in the Regiment was that those who remained behind
should look after those who went to fight. In the South African war
especially the custom of sending out comforts to the Battalions in the
field was brought to a pitch of perfection, and during the two years
that campaign lasted the 2nd and 3rd Battalions were well provided
for. When the war broke out in 1914, the first care of the regimental
authorities was to see that the men in the Expeditionary Force wanted
for nothing, and also that their families were adequately provided
for. Colonel Gordon-Gilmour, who was temporarily in command of the
Regiment in August 1914, came to the conclusion that the mass of
routine work was as much as the Regimental Orderly Room could cope
with, and that if a Comforts Fund was to be a success, it would be
necessary to invoke the aid of an old officer. He therefore asked
Major-General Sir Reginald Thynne (an old Commanding Officer of the 3rd
Battalion) to undertake the arduous task. At that time all existing
organisations were being strained to their utmost to cope with the vast
numbers of men who were flocking to the army.

As soon as Sir Reginald Thynne grasped the immensity of the task he had
undertaken, he sent round an appeal to all officers past and present,
and raised a substantial sum for the initial expenses. Two funds were
started: the Comforts Fund and the Families Relief Fund. The former was
entirely for men at the front, and was managed by Sir Reginald Thynne
himself. The latter was under the direction of Sir Reginald Thynne as
Treasurer and Colonel C. Rowley as Secretary until November 1915, when
Lieut.-Colonel Viscount Colville became Treasurer and Mrs. Stucley,
Secretary. In September 1914 a small Committee, consisting of the wives
of officers and presided over by Lady Florence Streatfeild, was formed,
and the whole organisation was put on a thoroughly business-like
footing, but the number of men who joined the Regiment increased with
such rapidity that it was found necessary to enlarge the Committee.

The following ladies eventually formed the Committee:

Lady Ardee, the Hon. Mrs. Wilfred Smith, Mrs. Fisher-Rowe, the Hon.
Mrs. Corry (who resigned later on account of illness), the Hon. Mrs.
Dalrymple-White, the Hon. Mrs. Earle (who resigned later and went to
Switzerland to join her husband), Mrs. Montgomerie, the Hon. Mrs. G.
Legh, Mrs. Ricardo, Viscountess St. Cyres, Lady Helen Seymour, Mrs.
Barrington-Kennett, Mrs. St. Leger Glyn, and Mrs. Stucley.

When the Committee first started it was decided to look after families
only on the married roll, leaving the others to be dealt with by the
Soldiers' and Sailors' Families Association, to which the Regiment sent
a subscription of £100; but it was found that families were so well
provided for by Separation Allowances, that it was only in special
cases that assistance was needed. The Committee, therefore, undertook
to assist special cases, whether they were married people on the
strength or not. The ladies of the Committee kept in constant touch
with each family either by correspondence or by personal visit, and by
degrees they were able to ensure that every case was looked after.

When the cold weather arrived, the needs of the men at the front became
of paramount importance, and the wives of officers, non-commissioned
officers, and men set to work to make warm mittens and hand-made socks,
the wool being provided to a great extent by the Comforts Fund.

Owing to certain officers contributing large sums to the Comforts
Fund, which had already been generously supported by the officers,
Sir Reginald Thynne was able to send, in addition to what are called
comforts, newspapers, tobacco, and cigarettes every fortnight, as
well as footballs, boxing-gloves, and other things that the men love.
Colonel Streatfeild also decided to supplement the appliances supplied
by the War Office, and sanctioned the supply by the fund of such
articles as trench periscopes, telephones, and bicycles for orderlies.
Later, gramophones were provided, and when Christmas came Sir Reginald
Thynne was able to send a plum-pudding to each man at the front.
This necessitated 2000 plum-puddings being sent in 1914, and 4000 in
1915 and 1916, in addition to a certain number to the Grenadiers on
the Brigade and Divisional Staffs. During the last two years of the
war, the supply of plum-puddings for all the Expeditionary Forces was
undertaken by the Director-General of Voluntary Organisations.


                         PRISONERS OF WAR FUND

Early in the war the problem of how to deal with the Prisoners of
War had to be faced, and Sir Reginald Thynne, having organised the
Comforts Fund, now turned his attention to this at the request of
Colonel Streatfeild. The Grenadiers were fortunate in having far fewer
prisoners than other regiments, but the fact that there were men of the
Regiment at the mercy of a country, which had proved itself capable
of the most dastardly cruelty, was enough to warrant energetic steps
being taken at once to ensure that the men in Germany should not starve.

Major-General Sir Reginald Thynne set to work to devise some
organisation by which parcels of food would reach the prisoners
regularly, and a Prisoners of War Fund, to which many old officers of
the Regiment contributed, was started, and in the initial stages was
partly financed by the Comforts Fund.

In the first place it was decided to send all men in Germany a good
parcel of food and some tobacco every fortnight, but this was not
enough, and a system was started by which many prisoners of war of the
Regiment were "adopted" by a lady belonging to the Regiment, a wife, a
mother, or a sister of an officer. The adopter was asked to undertake
the despatch of a parcel once a fortnight, so that with the parcels
from the Fund each prisoner received weekly a sufficient supply of
food. This worked admirably, but the labour involved was necessarily
heavy, since the men were constantly moved from one place to another.

By an arrangement with the American Embassy in Berlin a complete refit
of outer and under clothing was sent to each prisoner by Colonel
Streatfeild, but these were not provided by the Prisoners of War Fund.

This method of supplying food to the prisoners in Germany was not
altogether satisfactory. In the first place, men in good regiments were
much better looked after than those who belonged to regiments where
there was no organisation for the care of prisoners; and in the second
place, it was open to abuse. Some men, for instance, wrote to various
people in England and obtained by this means more parcels than they
could possibly want. One prisoner managed by diligent writing to obtain
as many as fifty parcels. The difficulty of getting food into Germany
increased as the war went on, and it was soon found that the whole
problem had become too big for voluntary effort. Accordingly in October
1916 a Central Prisoners of War Committee was formed under the auspices
of the Government, and the supply of regular food was officially taken
in hand with the aid of the American Embassy in Berlin. This did not
entail the abolition of the various regimental funds, but it ensured
every prisoner being provided with an adequate amount of food. After
this the packets of food were sent with a Red Cross label, provided
by the authorities, and no parcel could be sent, unless it had been
packed by the Central Committee, or under their authority, as they were
responsible that the parcels contained nothing that contravened the
regulations. No prisoner was allowed to receive parcels from more than
one authorised organisation.

The following memorandum was issued for the guidance of the prisoners'
relations and friends:


                SYSTEM OF SENDING PARCELS TO GRENADIER
                      PRISONERS OF WAR IN GERMANY

   1. No parcels either of food, tobacco, tea, or clothing can
   now be sent by private individuals to these prisoners, nor
   should monetary assistance be given to any agency except
   our own. Books can be sent to them only through authorised
   publishers, such as Mudie's, W. H. Smith, and Bumpus.
   Gramophones, boxing-gloves, and a few other such articles
   can sometimes be sent by special request through the Central
   Prisoners of War Committee, 4 Thurloe Place, S.W.7.

   We cannot accept parcels from individuals to be forwarded to
   prisoners, but only subscriptions to our funds.

   2. Details of parcels are as follows:

   (1) Assorted food parcels (weight under 11 lbs. gross) are
   sent three times per fortnight to each prisoner at the cost
   of £6: 15s. per man per quarter, or £2: 5s. per parcel per
   quarter. Each parcel contains 1 cake of soap, and frequently
   other necessaries applied for by the men.

   (2) 1 lb. of tea (in a separate parcel) is sent out per month
   to each man, costing 1s. 8d. per month, duty free.

   (3) 250 cigarettes or ½ lb. of tobacco, as preferred, is sent
   to each man (in a separate parcel) costing 3s. 8d. per month,
   duty free.

   (4) A separate supply of bread or biscuits, according to
   season, is sent to the Camps by the Central Prisoners of War
   Committee, and each man should receive 4 lbs. per week. In
   future we shall have to pay for this, and it will cost us 8s.
   per man per month (based on 7s. 6d. per four weeks).

   (5) A complete outfit of clothing is sent out to each man
   twice yearly.

   3. We classify our subscribers as follows:

   (_a_) _Adopters_, who subscribe for parcels to specified and
   named men, paying £2: 5s. per quarter for each fortnightly
   parcel. In some cases an adopter pays £4: 10s. for two, or £6:
   15s. for three fortnightly parcels all sent to the same man;
   in other cases an adopter takes over two men or three men, or
   more, and pays for one or more fortnightly parcels each. The
   names of the senders cannot, owing to shortage of labour, be
   written on parcels, and the subscriber writes to the prisoner
   to let him know what is being done for him.

   (_b_) _Friends or relations_, who subscribe monthly, or
   occasionally, for the tea, tobacco, or bread, at the prices
   above quoted, or pay 7s. occasionally when they wish to
   provide for one of the regular parcels.

   (_c_) _Givers of donations_, of various amounts to be used as
   we think best.

   _N.B._--It is possible for relations of prisoners by applying
   to the Regimental Orderly Room to get allotments made to
   them out of the prisoner's pay, in order to enable them to
   subscribe to us. This can only be done when a prisoner writes
   to say he wishes it, and defines the amount of the allotment.

These instructions were altered several times, and new rules and
conditions were added. Soon after the official system came into
force, there was an unfortunate hitch about the bread. The Central
Prisoners of War Committee, which had undertaken the supply, found
that the arrangements they had made for its manufacture and despatch
from Copenhagen were anything but satisfactory; complaints from the
prisoners showed that the system was not working well. Steps were at
once taken by the Central Prisoners of War Committee to rectify the
fault, and afterwards the supply was carried out satisfactorily from
Copenhagen and Berne.

One prisoner, who wished to inform his friends of the true state of
affairs, and who feared his remarks would not pass the Censor, wrote
on a postcard, "1 Corinthians iv. 11." The German Censor's biblical
knowledge was fortunately weak, and he allowed the card to go. The
text referred to was:

   Even unto this present hour we both hunger, and thirst,
   and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain
   dwelling-place.

Early in 1917 the relatives of the men in Germany began to hear more
frequently from them, and to learn how badly some of them were being
treated. Thus a considerable correspondence grew up with these anxious
people, as well as with the prisoners themselves, and General Thynne
had to ask the Lieutenant-Colonel to give him some help. Lieutenant
Bernard Samuelson, who was at that time incapacitated for active
service by wounds, therefore joined in the work; in July of that
year, General Thynne requiring a short holiday, Lieutenant A. O.
Whitehead (also wounded) helped; and when General Thynne returned,
and Lieutenant Samuelson, who had rendered most able assistance, had
rejoined for active duty, Lieutenant Whitehead continued to work with
General Thynne. Being a business man with more than common capacity
and experience, Mr. Whitehead's assistance and powers of organisation
were invaluable, for the clerical work and correspondence had become
considerable, and he devoted himself to the work with the greatest zeal
and interest.

In the autumn of 1917 it became very difficult to procure the necessary
supplies of provisions; in fact, some essential articles were
absolutely unobtainable. It was, therefore, decided to ask the Central
Prisoners of War Committee to pack and despatch the parcels, which
they were able to do, as they had very large contracts for supplies;
and this they continued to do with most satisfactory results until the
cessation of hostilities, November 11, 1918.

During 1918 the number of prisoners greatly increased, principally
because the 4th Battalion had been surrounded by the enemy, when under
orders to hold the position at all costs near Merville, and, whilst
losing heavily in casualties, had had over 250 men captured. The other
Battalions lost some men captured during the fighting in August and
September, thus bringing the total up to 475, including 27 men interned
in Holland, and 6 in Switzerland, besides several badly wounded men
repatriated, 3 who died in captivity, and 2 who escaped.


                      HOSPITAL VISITING COMMITTEE

         _President_--Colonel Sir HENRY STREATFEILD, K.C.V.O.,
                             C.B., C.M.G.

                 _Secretary_--Mrs. H. ST. L. STUCLEY.

                Assisted by the ladies of the Regiment.

The members of this Committee visited the sick and wounded men of the
Regiment in hospitals in the London district every week, taking them
cigarettes, books, and other comforts. The good work done by this
Committee cannot be too highly valued. The patients appreciated the
kindly sympathy of the Regiment conveyed by the ladies, and looked
forward to the weekly visit.

826 men were visited in the London hospitals, and the work of the
Committee was extended to provincial hospitals when visitors were
available.


                    SERGEANTS PAST AND PRESENT CLUB

                     _President_--Mr. J. HINGLEY.

                   _Hon. Treasurer_--Mr. A. HASKELL.

           _Hon. Secretary_--Supt. Clerk W. FAWCETT, M.B.E.

The Club has been inactive during the war, but was revived on the
return of the Battalions from France. Many old members maintained their
connection with the Club, and the total number of members is now 230.


                       OLD COMRADES ASSOCIATION

      _President_--Lieut.-Col. Lord F. G. MONTAGU-DOUGLAS-SCOTT,
                                D.S.O.

    _Hon. Treasurer and Secretary_--Lieut.-Col. W. GARTON, O.B.E.,
                87 Merton Hall Road, Wimbledon, S.W.19.

This Association numbered 4000 members. All Old Comrades who required
help were assisted from Regimental Funds, in the manner most suitable
to the needs of the applicants. The annual meeting of the Association
was held at Chelsea Barracks on March 29, 1919.

H.R.H. the Prince of Wales was present, and a large number of members
attended.

A Dinner was given at the close of the meeting by the Officer
Commanding 5th (Reserve) Battalion.


                RELIEF AND CHARITABLE WORK CARRIED OUT
                      AT REGIMENTAL HEADQUARTERS

                           _Discharged Men_

A letter was sent to all discharged men, offering assistance and giving
information regarding the Guards Employment Society.

Discharged men were encouraged to communicate with Regimental
Headquarters in all their troubles, and help was always given in one
form or another.

Many letters and applications were received, and all were
sympathetically replied to and assisted where necessary.


                            _Memorial Fund_

This Fund was founded in 1915 by sums of money given by relatives to
perpetuate the memory of Officers who have been killed in action or
died of wounds.

Various sums have been given to this Fund by relatives of deceased
Officers, and, in addition, the late Major-General Hon. W. S. D. Home
and Captain T. F. J. N. Thorne each bequeathed £1000 to the Fund. A
total of £18,000 was invested in addition to the sum of £2100 placed at
the disposal of the Lieut.-Colonel, the interest of which was paid to
this Fund.

All money received was invested, and only the interest is used in
relieving distress amongst the widows, wives, and children, and
assisting discharged N.C.O.'s and men.


                 _Roehampton Hospital Beds Endowment_

An appeal was made in 1916 to Officers, past and present, to enable
Grenadier Guards Beds to be endowed in Queen Mary's Convalescent
Auxiliary Hospital, Roehampton, where limbless men receive special
treatment, are fitted with artificial limbs, and taught how to use them.

A sum sufficient to endow eight beds for two years was obtained,
and sufficient donations have been received since to enable the
Lieut.-Colonel to renew the endowment of two beds for four years.


                      _Star and Garter Hospital_

In June 1918, a room at the Star and Garter Hospital at Richmond
was endowed by G. H. Windeler, Esq., the father of the late Second
Lieutenant H. W. Windeler, the necessary funds having been subscribed
by the Boston friends of that officer and of the late Second
Lieutenant Hartley, Coldstream Guards, and Mr. Farnsworth, French
Foreign Legion. The room was named after these officers. Nomination to
the occupation of the room was in the hands of the Officers Commanding
Grenadier Guards and Coldstream Guards, the right to nominate to run
alternately, commencing with the Grenadier Guards.


                            _Holiday Homes_

By the generosity of an Officer of the Regiment and his wife, a number
of the wives and children of warrant and non-commissioned officers and
men were sent to the seaside for a holiday every year. These holidays
began first in 1918, and have been greatly appreciated.




                              APPENDIX I

                 THE CASUALTIES IN THE GUARDS DIVISION


[Sidenote: Appendix I.]

    +---------------------+----------------+----------------+
    |                     |    Officers.   |  Other Ranks.  |
    |                     +-------+--------+-------+--------+
    |                     |Killed.|Wounded.|Killed.|Wounded.|
    +---------------------+-------+--------+-------+--------+
    |Grenadier Guards     |  203  |   242  | 4,508 |  6,939 |
    |Coldstream Guards    |  168  |   328  | 3,510 |  9,061 |
    |Scots Guards         |  107  |   149  | 2,072 |  4,002 |
    |Irish Guards         |  115  |   199  | 2,234 |  5,540 |
    |Welsh Guards.        |   34  |    55  |   822 |  1,700 |
    |Guards M.G. Regiment |   21  |    47  |   187 |  2,090 |
    +---------------------+-------+--------+-------+--------+
    |    Total            |  648  | 1,020  |13,333 | 29,332 |
    +---------------------+-------+--------+-------+--------+




                              APPENDIX II

                        THE TITLE "GRENADIERS"


[Sidenote: APPENDIX II.]

During 1915 the whole Regiment was much perturbed by the official use
of the word "grenadier" as applied to men in all regiments who were
being trained to throw bombs. This expression began to creep into
official documents in April, and about this time a memorandum was
published by General Headquarters on the training and employment of
"grenadiers." In June the Army Council addressed a circular letter
to officers commanding battalions, by which authority was given for
the training of a detachment in each battalion, consisting of one
officer, two sergeants, and 56 other ranks, as "grenadiers." Badges for
"regimental and battalion grenadiers" were described in some additional
paragraphs to the Dress Regulations, which were issued in Army Orders
in October.

Eventually Colonel H. Streatfeild decided to take up the matter
officially, and on November 29 sent the following letter to
Major-General Lord Cavan, commanding the Guards Division:

   "I respectfully beg to bring to your notice, and to strongly
   protest against, what I consider is an usurpation of the
   rights and privileges of the Regiment under my command, by
   the establishment of 'GRENADIERS' to all battalions
   of the Army by Army Order of the 11th October 1915, and would
   venture to suggest that the name of 'GRENADIERS'
   given to Regimental Bomb Throwers be altered to
   'BOMBERS.'

   "In the _London Gazette_ of 29th July 1815 the First Regiment
   of Foot Guards had bestowed upon it the title of 'First or
   Grenadier Regiment of Foot Guards' in commemoration of their
   having defeated the Grenadiers of the French Imperial Guard at
   the Battle of Waterloo.

   "This distinction the Regiment has proudly borne for the past
   100 years, and it is a source of regret to all ranks that at
   this period, when there are four battalions of the Regiment
   upon Active Service, this title, which was granted exclusively
   to the Grenadier Guards as a reward for services in the Field,
   should in any way be invalidated."

On receipt of Colonel Streatfeild's protest, Lord Cavan wrote to
General Headquarters:

   "I beg with great deference to raise a question of privilege.
   The word and title Grenadier is now seen in all official
   documents to denote a man who throws a bomb. This title was
   given to the First Guards for service rendered at Waterloo,
   and they are naturally jealous of the honour."

   "In conversation the word bomber is general, but if this is
   not sufficiently dignified for official documents I most
   respectfully suggest that 'bomb thrower' be the recognised
   title."

To this the Adjutant-General at General Headquarters in France sent the
following reply:

   "The term bomb is officially confined to projectiles fired
   from trench mortars or dropped from aeroplanes. Projectiles
   thrown by hand are 'grenades.'

   "The G.O.C. Guards Division is in error in supposing that
   the Grenadier Guards are the only Regiment in which the word
   grenadier forms part of the title of the Regiment.

   "It would appear that the term Grenadiers is merely an
   unofficial abbreviation of Grenadier Guards, and does not
   appear in any official documents in relation to that Regiment.

   "The Grenade fired proper is the badge of many Regiments,
   and it would seem that a claim to the sole use of the title
   'Grenadier' has as little foundation as one to be the only
   wearers of the Grenade badge.

   "It would seem that Modern Warfare has necessitated a partial
   return to the Grenadier Companies of former days which it is
   believed existed without any prejudice to the rights of the
   Grenadier Guards."

Lord Cavan, however, could not let the matter rest there, and again
wrote to the Adjutant-General on December 22, meeting the arguments put
forward by him. He said:

   "I beg respectfully to reply to the remarks of the A.G.

   "In Para. 2. He says the G.O.C. Guards Division is in error
   in supposing that the Grenadier Guards are the only Regiment
   in which the word 'grenadier' forms part of the title of
   the Regiment. The G.O.C. Guards Division never made this
   supposition, and is perfectly aware that the Indian Army
   contains the 101st Grenadier and the 102nd King Edward's Own
   Grenadiers, and there are also some Colonial Grenadiers,
   but he is not aware that any British Regiment has the word
   grenadier as part of its title except the First Guards.

   "Reference Para. 4. No claim to be the only wearers of
   a Grenade Badge was made, but the title Grenadiers was
   officially given in the _London Gazette_ of July 1815 to the
   First Guards in commemoration of their having defeated the
   Grenadiers of the Imperial Guard at Waterloo.

   "The title of Grenadier Company is of course of ancient
   origin and was almost universal. If resuscitated it would be
   welcome and would solve the problem; if a report stated that
   'the Grenadier Company of the ---- Battalion then attacked'
   no objection would be raised, but if the report was worded
   'the Grenadiers then advanced,' I consider it not only an
   infringement of privileges but misleading to future historians.

   "Had the weapon been the carbine or carabine or the Fusil
   the same confusion would have arisen with the Carabineers or
   Fusiliers.

   "It is in no carping spirit that this letter is written, but
   I most respectfully beg to emphasise my point that the title
   'Grenadiers' was a battle honour given to the First Guards and
   as such should be respected."

Finding it impossible to get any redress in France, Colonel Streatfeild
in January 1916 appealed to the King, as Colonel-in-Chief of the
Regiment, and His Majesty promised to look into the question. Nothing
was done till March, and then at last, in deference to the King's
expressed wish, the Army Council decided that in future the word
"Bomber" should be used instead of "Grenadier." The decision was
embodied in the following Order:

                                                     WAR OFFICE,
                                                  _28th March 1916._

   673. BOMBERS.

   The term "Grenadier" will no longer be applied to men trained
   or employed in the use of hand-grenades.

   Such men will in future be designated "Bombers."

                                                 121/7862 (A.G. 1).

                     By Command of the Army Council,

                         (Signed)               R. H. BRADE.




                             APPENDIX III

                     OFFICERS KILLED IN ACTION OR
                            DIED OF WOUNDS


                           BRIGADIER-GENERAL

    Batt.                                                        Date.
         Nugent, G. C., M.V.O.                                31/5/15


                          LIEUTENANT-COLONELS

         Clive, P. A. (wounded 6/8/15 and 3/11/16) (attached
           Lancs. Fus.)                                         5/4/18
      1  Fisher-Rowe, L. R.                                    13/3/15
      1  Hope, G. E., M.C. (Actg. Lieut.-Col., attached
           Lancs. Fusiliers) (wounded 4/11/14)                10/10/17
      2  Smith, W. R. A., C.M.G.                               18/5/15
         Trotter, E. H., D.S.O. (attached Liverpool Regiment)   8/7/15


                                MAJORS

      2  Barrington-Kennett, B. H.                             18/5/15
      1  Colby, L. R. V.                                      25/10/14
         Crichton, H. F. (Irish Guards)                         1/9/14
      1  Duberly, G. W.                                        13/3/15
      2  Gordon-Lennox, Lord B. C.                            13/11/14
      3  Molyneux-Montgomerie, G. F.                          22/10/15
      1  Nicol, W. E., D.S.O. (wounded 29/5/15)                1/10/15
      4  Ponsonby, Hon. C. M. B., M.V.O. (wounded 29/10/14)    27/9/15
         Quilter, J. A. C. (M.E.F., Comdg. Hood Batt.
           Naval Brigade)                                       7/5/15
      1  Stucley, H. St. L.                                   29/10/14
      1  Weld-Forester, Hon. A. O. W. C., M.V.O.
           (wounded 29/10/14)                                  1/11/14


                               CAPTAINS

      1  Baker, C. D. (wounded 25/1/16)                        29/7/17
      2  Beaumont-Nesbitt, W. H., M.C. (wounded 25/9/16)      27/11/17
         Blackett, W. S. B. (attached Leicester Yeo.)
           (wounded 18/11/14)                                 25/11/14
      4  Burke, J. B. M., M.C. (wounded 6/8/17)                1/12/17
      2  Carter, J. S.                                         27/9/18
      2  Cecil, Hon. W. A.                                     16/9/14
      4  Chapman, M., M.C. (wounded 6/7/16 and 25/11/17)       12/4/18
      2  Cholmeley, Sir M. R. A., Bart.                       24/12/14
      2  Cunninghame, A. K. S. (slightly wounded 9/7/16)       25/9/16
      1  Douglas-Pennant, Hon. G. S.                           11/3/15
      2  Derriman, G. L. (wounded 20/7/15)                      9/8/15
      1  Drury-Lowe, W. D., D.S.O.                             25/9/16
      4  Filmer, Sir R. M., Bart. (wounded 24/1/16)            26/1/16
    1/4  Goschen, C. G. (wounded 23/7/15 and 11/9/16)          25/9/16
      2  Gosselin, A. B. R. R., D.S.O. (wounded 14/9/14)        7/2/15
      1  Graham, A. C.                                      10-12/9/16
      3  Gunnis, G. G., M.C. (wounded 14-17/9/16)             13/10/16
      4  Houstoun-Boswall, Sir G. R., Bart. (missing
           27/9/15), assumed to have died                      27/9/15
      2  Lloyd, M. K. A. (wounded about 24/10/14)              15/9/16
      2  MacDougall, I. (missing 1/9/14)                        1/9/14
      3  Mackenzie, A. K. (wounded 14/9/14)                    16/9/16
      1  Malcolm, P. (wounded 27/9/15 and 16/4/17)             25/8/18
         Maxwell, A. E. (wounded 8/10/14) (attached Naval
           Brigade)                                            9/10/14
      3  Murray, W. R. C. (wounded 27/9/15)                    25/2/17
      3  Parker, R. W. (wounded 26/7/17 and 27/3/18)           28/3/18
      4  Paton, G. H. T., V.C.                                 1/12/17
      2  Payne-Gallwey, Sir W. T., Bart., M.V.O., assumed
           to have died on or since                            14/9/14
      4  Penn, E. F.                                          18/10/15
      4  Pixley, J. N. F.                                     12/10/17
      1  Rennie, G.                                           29/10/14
      1  Sartorius, E. F. F. (wounded 11/3/15)                  5/4/15
      1  Shelley, E. B. (wounded 10-12/9/16)                   12/9/18
      4  Sloane-Stanley, H. H., M.C.                           13/4/18
      3  Stanhope, Hon. R. P. (missing 14-17/9/16)             16/9/16
      2  Stephen, D. C. L.                                      8/9/14
      4  Stewart, W. A. L. (wounded 14/9/14)                   25/9/16
      2  Symes-Thompson, C.                                   18/11/14
      4  Thorne, T. F. J. N.                                   27/9/15
      1  Wellesley, Lord R.                                   27/10/14


                              LIEUTENANTS

      4  Abbey, N. R.                                          12/4/18
      3  Anson, A.                                            11/10/15
      1  Antrobus, E.                                         24/10/14
      3  Asquith, R.                                           15/9/16
      1  Bibby, J. P.                                         12/10/17
      1  Brabourne, W. W., Lord                                11/3/15
      4  Boyton, H. J.                                        14/12/16
      1  Byng, L. G., M.C.                                     24/8/18
      1  Chamberlain, N. G.                                    1/12/17
      4  Chitty, J. M. (on or since)                           1/12/17
      2  Congleton, H. B. F., Lord                            10/11/14
      1  Corry, A. V. L., M.C. (wounded 10/8/15)            10-12/9/16
      M.G.C. Cottle, W. E. W.                                  31/7/17
      3  Crabbe, C. T. E.                                      27/9/15
      1  Darby, M. A. A.                                       11/3/15
      1  Dashwood, W. J. (wounded 21/9/16)                      2/8/17
      2  Des Vœux, F. W.                                       14/9/14
      1  Douglas-Pennant, Hon. A. G. S.                       29/10/14
      3  Dunlop, B. J.                                         31/7/17
      4  Ellice, A. R. (wounded 25/9/16)                       29/9/16
      1  Ethelston, H. W.                                      13/3/15
      4  Farquhar, R.                                          17/9/17
         M.G.C. Fraser, J. C. (missing, believed drowned)       9/9/18
      3  Gardner, C. G. (missing 14-17/9/16)                14-17/9/16
      1  Gascoigne, I. C. (wounded 6/4/18)                     12/4/18
      2  Gwyer, C.                                             27/8/18
      2  Harter, H. H.                                         9/10/17
      2  Harvard, K. O'G.                                       1/8/17
      M.G.C. Higginson, T. C.                                  15/9/16
      1  Hughes, G.                                             5/8/18
      1  Johnson, H. J. G.                                      7/8/17
      4  Joicey-Cecil, J. F. J.                                25/9/16
         Keating, H. S. (attached Irish Guards)                20/1/15
      2  Knatchbull-Hugessen, M.A., M.C.                       25/9/16
      2  Lawrence, G. F.                                       27/8/18
      2  Lawson-Johnston, A. Mc. W., M.C.                      22/2/17
      1  Leeke, C. (wounded 7/4/16)                            12/4/16
      2  Lubbock, Hon. H. F. P.                                 4/4/18
      4  Lyon, F. C., on or since                              13/4/18
      4  MacLear, B. G. H., M.C.                               26/7/16
      2  Manners, Hon. J. N.                                    1/9/14
      2  Marshall, F. G.                                       22/3/15
         Maurice, F. T.                                       29/10/18
      2  Miller, F. W. J. M.                                  23/10/14
      1  Morris, A. A.                                         27/9/18
      2  Napier, R. G. C. (wounded 31/7/17)                     2/8/17
      2  Oliver, R. M. (wounded 26/8/18)                       27/8/18
      3  Orris, W. G. (wounded 9/2/17 and 28/3/18)             29/3/18
      2  Parnell, Hon. W. A. D., M.C.                          25/9/16
      3  Pauling, G. F., M.C. (wounded 30/7/17)                25/3/18
      4  Payne-Gallwey, M. H. F.                               25/9/16
      2  Ponsonby, M. H. (wounded 29/1/18)                     27/8/18
      4  Pryce, T. T., V.C., M.C. (Actg. Capt.)                13/4/18
         Radcliffe, D. J. J. (attached Corps School)          31/10/17
      4  Rolfe, R. H. (wounded 24/7/17 and 25/3/18)            22/4/18
      3  Stainton, W. A. (missing 14-17/9/16)                  15/9/16
      2  Stocks, M. G.                                        10/11/14
      4  Stratford, H. D. (wounded 9/10/17)                    13/4/18
      4  Tennant, Hon. E. W.                                   22/9/16
      3  Tetley, J. C. D.                                      9/10/17
      M.G.C. Thomas, O. C. (wounded 14/9/17)                   1/12/17
      4  Tompson, R. F. C.                                     11/9/16
      2  Tudway, H. R. C. (wounded 11-13/11/14)               18/11/14
      2  Tufnell, C. W.                                        6/11/14
      1  Van Neck, P.                                         26/10/14
      M.G.C. Vernon, H. D.                                     15/9/16
      2  Welby, R. W. G.                                       16/9/14
      2  Williams, E. G.                                       12/8/15
      3  Worsley, J. F. (wounded 31/7/17), on or since        27/11/17
      3  Wynne, E. H. J.                                       16/9/16


                          SECOND LIEUTENANTS

         Adams, C. J. N.                                      14/11/18
      1  Alexander, H.                                        17/10/15
      1  Anderson, A. D.                                       6/11/18
      2  Arbuthnot, G. A.                                      25/9/16
      2  Arbuthnott, J. (wounded 15/9/16)                      16/9/16
         Ayles, F. P.                                           1/6/18
      2  Bailey, Hon. G. S.                                    10/8/15
      1  Barber, G. E.                                         24/8/18
      M.G.C. Bentley, F. D.                                   30/11/17
      2  Blackwood, Lord I. B. G. T.                            3/7/17
      1  Burnand, C. F.                                        11/3/15
      2  Burton, J. S.                                         16/5/16
         Bury, H. S. E. (attached Scots Guards)                28/1/15
      1  Carson, R. H.                                          4/9/17
      2  Cecil, G. E.                                           1/9/14
      1  Chapple, J. W.                                        31/7/17
      1  Charteris, Hon. I. A.                                17/10/15
      1  Cholmeley, H. V.                                       7/4/16
      2  Corkran, R. S. (wounded 7/6/15)                       11/6/15
      4  Constable, D. O.                                      25/9/16
      2  Creed, C. O. (wounded 18/5/15)                         2/6/15
      1  Crisp, F. E. F.                                        5/1/15
      4  Dawson-Greene, C. J.                                  25/3/18
      4  Denman, R. C.                                         1/12/17
      1  Dudley-Smith, C. J.                                   16/6/15
      3  Durbin, P.                                            25/3/17
      2  Finch, H. A.                                          27/8/18
      1  Fleet, W. A. (wounded 5/9/17)                         18/5/18
         Fletcher, G. H. (attached Scots Guards)               25/1/15
      4  Flower, A. C.                                         25/9/16
      1  Foster, A. C.                                         11/3/15
      4  Gault, R. A.                                          16/9/16
      1  Gelderd-Somervell, R. F. C. (wounded 11/3/15)         11/3/15
      1  Grant, A.                                             27/9/18
      3  Greenhill, F. W. R.                                  10/10/17
      3  Gunther, G. R., M.C.                                  4/11/18
      1  Hall-Watt, R.                                        13/10/17
      1  Hamilton, G. E. A. A. FitzG.                          18/5/18
      2  Harbord, P. A., M.C.                                  1/12/17
      1  Hargreaves, S. J.                                     19/5/18
      1  Harvard, L. de J. (wounded 25/9/16)                   30/3/18
      2  Harvey, D. (wounded 15/9/16)                          27/8/18
      2  Hasler, A. (wounded 15/9/16)                          18/9/16
      1  Hoare, E.                                              9/5/16
      2  Hopley, G. W. V.                                      12/5/15
      4  Hubbard, B. J., M.C.                                  1/12/17
      3  Jackson, G. D., on or since                           14/9/16
      1  King, E. G. L. (wounded 10-12/9/16)                   22/7/17
      1  Lamont, G. S., D.S.O.                                 4/11/18
         Lang, A. H. (attached 1st Batt. Scots Guards)         28/1/15
      2  Langley, F. J. (wounded 6/3/18 and 30/3/18)           22/8/18
      2  Lee-Steere, J. H. G.                                 17/11/14
      1  Mays, C. C.                                           30/3/18
      1  Neale, G. D.                                          18/5/18
      2  Nevill, J. H. G.                                     24/12/14
      2  Osborne, B. R.                                        4/11/18
      4  Pearce, N. A.                                        25/11/17
      2  Pearson, S. H.                                        1/12/17
      1  Phillipps, R. W.                                     26/10/15
      2  Pickersgill-Cunliffe, J. R.                           14/9/14
      3  Ranney, R. van T.                                     28/3/18
      4  Richardson, R. D. (wounded 21/4/18)                   26/4/18
      1  Rocke, C. O.                                          23/8/18
      3  Roper, W. H. S.                                      11/10/17
      1  Sim, L. G. E.                                      14-16/9/16
      1  Somerset, N. A. H.                                   23/10/14
         Stewart, H. W. (wounded 11/10/17 and 27/3/18)         27/8/18
      3  Strangways-Rogers, A. E. F. F. (wounded 4/11/18)      4/11/18
      3  Thrupp, M. (wounded 3/8/16 and 14-17/9/16)            31/7/17
      4  Tompson, A. H.                                        27/9/15
      2  Vereker, R.                                           25/8/14
      1  Wakeman, E. O. R.                                  15-18/5/15
      1  Walter, S.                                           23/10/14
      1  Warner, A. A. J.                                      24/8/18
      3  Webster, G. V. G. A.                                   4/8/17
      2  White, H.                                             27/8/18
      3  Williams, R.                                          9/10/15
      4  Windeler, H. W.                                      28/11/17
      3  Worsley, E. G.                                        17/9/16




                              APPENDIX IV

   NOMINAL ROLL OF W.O.'s, N.C.O.'s, AND MEN WHO HAVE BEEN KILLED
     IN ACTION, OR WHO HAVE DIED OF WOUNDS OR DISEASE IN THE
     EUROPEAN WAR OF 1914-1918:--


[Sidenote: Appendix IV.]

                            SERGEANT-MAJORS

    11487  Hughes, W., M.C.
    20875  Thomas, A.


                        QUARTERMASTER-SERGEANT

    11652  O'Connor, W. G.


                        COMPANY SERGEANT-MAJORS

     8517  Bradbury, G.
     6384  Chamberlain, W. C.
    12424  Clarke, H.
    12138  Dunn, G., M.M.
     8421  Frost, E., D.C.M.
     8013  Garrard, E. J.
    10372  Hearn, C., M.M.
    11771  Huddlestone, F.
    13347  Kendrick, F. A.
    11219  Littleton, S.
     9950  Percival, R.
    11963  Streten, W. H.
    11718  Tyson, L. C.
    11290  Waterworth, W. H.


                    COMPANY QUARTERMASTER-SERGEANTS

    11550  Barrett, C.
    14620  Langley, W. J., D.C.M.
    11818  Malcolm, G.
    11059  Moore, F.
    12978  Parrott, H.
    10217  Richardson, G. L.
    13716  Thomas, W. J., M.M.
    10463  Thompson, E. J.


                           COLOUR-SERGEANTS

    7987  Mansfield, A.
    4126  Napier, W. H.


                               SERGEANTS

    14107  Akers, G. F.
    19015  Alderson, W.
    12631  Anness, T. A.
    15754  Ashman, E. W,
    15444  Ayres, C. E.
    14930  Bartlett, F. W.
    13094  Batchelor, W. J.
    16634  Belcher, W. W., D.C.M.
    10609  Bevan, F.
    10627  Bosworth, J., M.M.
    14102  Brahon, E.
    11366  Brain, T. H.
    15955  Bray, J. H.
    18654  Brewer, A.
    14049  Brewster, A.
    11772  Briggs, J. H.
    15494  Buckle, E., M.M.
    10592  Butler, F. G.
    11330  Buttle, R. W.
    15362  Bygrave, E. T.
    14058  Campion, A. F.
    12203  Carson, E.
    13053  Cartwright, J. T.
    13195  Chantrell, A. R.
    14539  Clinton, W.
    20460  Collyer, C. M.
    13580  Comley, E.
    19583  Cooper, W. T., D.C.M., M.M.
    15959  Cornwell, A. W.
     7727  Croft, H.
    14562  Cross, A.
    14512  Currie, A.
    16707  Curtis, E. E.
    15376  Cushen, W. H.
    12436  Cutler, M.
    11996  Davis, F. E.
    13714  Dench, A. C.
     6036  Digby, J. H.
    16109  Dix, E. H.
    13549  East, B.
    13055  Entwistle, C.
    11752  Evans, L. L.
    17673  Ewell, R. C., M.M.
     9388  Fry, E.
    14284  Gordon, H. W.
     9552  Gosling, R.
    13447  Gotts, W. A.
    12489  Gray, A. E.
    11440  Green, A.
    19461  Greenhill, D.
     8563  Grubb, T.
    13678  Grundy, H.
    15331  Hackett, H.
    16379  Hales, P. J.
    15393  Hall, L.
    14859  Harding, O. G.
     9419  Harmer, R. H.
    12295  Harper, E. J. H.
    13491  Harrison, G. H.
    13841  Harrison, J. C., D.C.M.
    17118  Harrop, W.
    11580  Harte, M.
    13727  Hatton, C. G., M.M.
    15655  Hawkes, W.
    15025  Hawkins, R.
    16096  Hayes, J. W.
     6680  Helyer, E. W.
    14729  Hollett, S.
    12687  Hopkins, F.
    16443  Hughes, J.
    19688  Hurley, H. L.
    15087  Jarman, G., D.C.M.
    12552  Jerram, A.
    15128  Jones, A. F., D.C.M.
    11916  Jones, H., D.C.M.
    16255  Jones, S. L.
    14910  Kent, F. G.
    10840  Lack, W. B.
    12056  Lafferty, W.
    11856  Lawrence, A. J.
    13832  Lee, W. R.
    13886  Lewis, S. T., M.M.
    11153  Locke, H. J.
    10371  Lyon, J., D.C.M., M.M.
    11448  Macey, C. F.
     7987  Mansfield, A.
    11517  Marshall, I.
     7799  Martin, G. E.
    11278  Mattock, D.
    15219  May, A. H.
     8278  Maynard, W. J.
    14772  Mills, A. J., D.C.M.
    10394  Munns, F. J.
    10176  Myson, E.
    11854  Oldham, A.
     8785  Packer, C. E.
    14265  Packwood, A. W. H.
    12836  Parker, F. C. M.M.
    12733  Philpin, C.
    10825  Pitt, W.
    20856  Prior, C. A.
     8355  Quinn, T.
    15122  Rhodes, J. H., V.C., D.C.M., and clasp.
    14429  Ritchie, W.
    15166  Roberts, H. R.
    13115  Russell, W. J.
    17790  Rymer, R. G.
    10765  Sanday, S.
    11816  Shakespeare, E.
    12002  Sharpe, A.
    11124  Sheehan, D.
    13373  Singleton, W.
    11761  Skerry, T.
    13260  Slim, H.
    13654  Smith, H.
    14785  Smith, J.
    12108  Smith, J. J.
    11836  Smith, W. J.
    15156  Snailham, C. H.
    13211  Spowage, A., D.C.M.
    20003  Stafford, R. C.
    16440  Stone, A.
    15179  Stone, A. G.
    18391  Teebay, J.
    14801  Thomas, J., D.C.M., M.M.
    15052  Thomas, J.
    11848  Thomas, W. J.
    11083  Thompson, F.
    14057  Todd, J.
    11946  Turner, H.
    11919  Tyler, A.
    14261  Upperton, W.
    13214  Vaughan, W. M. J.
    16043  Vowles, H. J.
    14465  Walters, A.
    14892  Walton, B., M.M.
    12778  Watts, W. A.
    14210  Webb, C. D.
    15491  Wentworth, W. H., M.M.
    11367  White, G.
    10928  Wiggins, A. W.
     9426  Williams, H., M.M.
    15392  Wood, E.
    15400  Wonnacott, T. J., D.C.M.


                            LANCE-SERGEANTS

    21630  Anning, G. T.
    10507  Asplin, F.
    15856  Bailey, A. C.
    18707  Bailey, E.
    19144  Bailey, J.
    17602  Barnes, J. B.
    19475  Barton, R.
    15792  Bell, E.
    13338  Bennett, A. E.
    10715  Bentley, A. W.
    10910  Bingham, J. W.
    15872  Blakemoor, G. C.
    14565  Brenchley, G. T.
    11665  Brown, A.
    23152  Brown, C., M.M.
    12371  Butler, W.
    12472  Cæsar, A. J.
    14340  Carnall, H. E.
    22783  Challis, J. A., M.M.
    21432  Clark, S. E.
    23653  Cogdell, W.
    14511  Cole, E.
    19467  Cook, A. H., M.M.
    20826  Cook, W. F.
    22054  Coulton, E.
    19867  Cripps, G. E.
    15919  Croucher, A. T.
    23813  Crundwell, F.
    24711  Dale, R. C.
    20399  Davies, H. R.
    11714  Dowsell, E. W.
    12593  Eden, E. G.
    23456  Eyers, A. G.
    14975  Farr, F. C. J.
    15446  Ford, R.
    15275  Fox, F.
    15666  Galer, F. J.
    12646  Garnett, J. E.
    17175  Gladding, C. T. R.
    14724  Golding, S.
    14911  Gregory, B.
    19830  Goodwin, F.
    15922  Green, T.
    18085  Hains, J. E. M.
    16828  Harding, W.
    20217  Hardy, H.
    17506  Harris, R.
    17407  Hartfield, F. G.
    15169  Hatton, G. L.
    10996  Hawker, A. A.
    16429  Haynes, E.
    16070  Hayward, C. M.
    15629  Hearn, R. C.
    23197  Herriman, V.
    13350  Hickling, G.
    12285  Hiles, W. C.
    16864  Hill, J. C. W.
    18396  Hinks, F. E.
    15657  Holley, F. W.
    13246  Hook, W.
    14221  Horgan, A. H.
    11706  Hunt, A. E.
    11489  Hunt, H. G.
    15799  Jackson, J.
    21382  Jeffcoat, W.
    12821  Kendall, W.
    19633  Kibble, E.
    20906  King, T.
    14447  Lamb, F.
    12043  Leech, E., M.M.
    15632  Lees, F.
    18919  Leeves, W.
    17149  Lloyd, F.
    19634  Locke, F., M.M.
    14898  Lockwood, C. A.
    13220  Lowdell, A. G.
    12957  McCulloch, G.
    13062  McDowell, J.
    14417  McKanna-Maulkin, A.
    18825  Manley, F. H.
    16915  Mann, C. W.
    13577  Mann, F.
    20356  Marsh, H., M.M.
    14830  Marshall, F. J.
    17654  Mason, F. W.
    12430  Matthews, W. C.
    16446  Miller, A. R.
    11314  Milnes, J. W.
    16843  Mitchell, F. C.
    17045  Mortimer, E. J.
    30294  Mountain, R. J.
    13820  Mulvey, J.
    13283  Nash, F.
    19574  Needham, E. C.
    15604  Newsome, W.
    14274  Nix, A.
    11091  Nuttall, H., M.M.
    17608  Palmer, W. C.
    23840  Parr, J. W.
    14421  Patten, J.
    19563  Payne, T. H.
    15138  Perrins, A.
    19057  Phipps, R. E.
    14079  Pickerill, T.
    13982  Pickering, J. W.
    11803  Pretty, W.
    19332  Rains, H. G.
    26798  Reynolds, S. E. C.
    17071  Robotham, W.
    16243  Roper, W., M.M.
    12280  Ruck, H. J.
    18347  Rumfitt, H.
    17577  Ryder, S. G.
    16616  Sayer, H. J.
    12960  Shea, H.
    10964  Shipton, M.
    20146  Shrimpton, H. E.
    18259  Smith, W.
    14788  Stenner, E.
    23846  Stephenson, G., M.M.
    12353  Stockdale, F. J., M.M.
    11912  Stokes, C.
    16779  Stolle, H. J.
    12062  Street, B.
    20961  Stride, F. C.
    13079  Strutt, H. C.
    12136  Studd, J.
    10785  Tamblin, P. J.
    13805  Tarlton, F. J.
    20939  Trotter, A.
    14288  Turner, W. D.
    12796  Varley, J.
    18930  Wakely, W.
    19488  Walsh, P., M.M.
    13789  Ward, H., M.M.
    11158  Watkins, R. J., M.M.
    15814  Watt, G.
    11238  Webster, H. M.
    19537  Webster, S.
    15607  Weller, S.
    19059  Whitaker, T., D.C.M.
    16339  Whitehouse, T. A.
    19372  Wigginton, F.
    12206  Wilkinson, T.
    10172  Williams, E.
    18100  Wilson, A., M.M.
    10015  Wiltshire, H.
    10612  Winfield, J. H.
    14266  Wood, A. A.
    19041  Wood, J. A. M.M.
    18339  Ward, A. W.


                               CORPORALS

    21635  Allen, S.
    19112  Bennett, D. W. (Signalling Corpl.)
    13325  Boocock, J.
    11203  Burke, V., M.M.
    25119  Cartwright, H.
    15833  Collard, P. C.
    19946  Crutchley, J. A.
    20869  Dale, P. J.
    10819  Davey, J.
    23763  Dickens, T. G., D.C.M.
    14382  Dickinson, J.
    14739  Dunphy, C. N.
    24092  Fasey, J. W.
    15466  Franklin, H. G.
    12370  Gregory, F. D.
    11698  Gundry, A. J.
    16445  Hammond, H. N.
    16983  Harris, J.
    15630  Horn, O. J.
    13458  Horwood, H. A.
     8464  Ingleby, H.
    19226  Jackson, H.
    15558  James, J.
    17006  Jones, A. H.
    13914  Jones, F.
    20346  Keep, P. W., M.M.
    21175  Kemp, C. W.
    13555  Kenney, H.
     8592  Kilmartin, E.
    13107  Lloyd, W. H.
    34446  McGrath, J.
    15365  Matthews, W. H.
    11208  Moore, W.
    16786  Orpwood, W.
    12827  Palfrey, E. G., M.M.
    11828  Palmer, I.
    14861  Parkes, E.
    17080  Pavitt, H.
    15719  Porter, C. A.
    15560  Potten, C. H.
    11454  Rees, J.
    16116  Ryall, H. E., M.M.
    15808  Sharpe, G.
    15147  Shaw, S.
    11056  Shipp, J.
    15720  Smith, E.
    10497  Stone, W.
    14471  Thomas, W., D.C.M.
    16778  Trevett, G.
    11880  Tuttle, A. H.
    12301  Wallis, A.
    16496  Weavin, W. H.


                            LANCE-CORPORALS

    17647  Abbott, A. C.
    26948  Abbott, J.
    15602  Abbott, W. J.
    26799  Abernethy, H.
    18248  Adam, J.
    21254  Aggett, E. W.
    23510  Alford, A. O.
    28647  Allen, F.
    29675  Allen, G.
    21123  Alway, F.
    19094  Archer, S.
    10729  Armstrong, A,
    23094  Armstrong, C.
    17286  Arland, J. W.
    24132  Arthur, W. J.
    20561  Ashman, J. C.
    12395  Askew, G.
    10067  Aspin, A.
    12517  Atherton, F.
    17069  Atkins, W. R.
    16358  Ayers, T. F.
    22086  Back, G. H.
    29600  Baker, H.
    18154  Balsdon, H. G.
    22849  Barker, E.
    28351  Barker, E. J.
    10847  Barker, J.
    16781  Barnes, F. H.
    20924  Barnes, M.
    28757  Barrett, W. R.
    14780  Beard, G. H.
    18564  Bebb, D. W.
    21347  Beer, T. J.
    27727  Bell, J.
    15688  Belson, A. G.
    17133  Benstead, F. M.
    23207  Bentley, F.
    24764  Berry, E.
    16848  Bessant, C. E.
    14112  Betty, S.
    24103  Bicknell, P. G.
    27290  Binns, J.
    25581  Birch, C. H.
    19874  Birch, W. H.
    22524  Bird, H. H.
    19224  Blackburn, D.
    14344  Blakeman, E.
    26544  Bond, E.
    25203  Bond, J. W.
    21243  Boston, J.
    27438  Boulter, C. H.
    13553  Boulton, A.
    19314  Boulton, F.
    22088  Bowden, H.
    18961  Boyce, J.
    27381  Bradley, T. H.
    23879  Bradshaw, E. C.
    23239  Brailsford, W. J.
    15469  Braine, L. F. H.
    13396  Bramwell, J.
    15036  Brandon, G.
    14784  Brennan, T.
    21791  Bridge, A.
    24962  Briggs, W. J.
    19937  Brighton, C. H.
    15474  Brignell, J. H.
    15583  Brisley, L. C.
    20817  Broadfoot, J. F., M.M.
    16633  Brotherwood, C.
    26327  Brown, C.
    20824  Bruce, J.
    13312  Burch, G. A.
    17448  Burgess, E. F.
    15387  Burr, S. A.
    12520  Bushell, W. T.
    27598  Buxton, H. S.
    24803  Cadman, J.
    28277  Campbell, J.
    21505  Campion, L.
    13937  Campion, R. P.
    19496  Cansfield, H. D.
    29555  Carey, G. V.
    15007  Carter, J. T.
    17923  Cartwright, J.
    23168  Caygill, T.
    28241  Catanach, A.
    18539  Champ, R.
    12895  Church, C.
    29717  Clare, E. F.
    10362  Clark, A.
    22932  Clark, B.
    19426  Clark, E. W.
    22464  Clarke, W.
    23819  Colclough, W.
    17077  Coles, J. T.
    15269  Collard, L. E.
    24243  Colwell, A.
    20867  Cooke, E.
    18595  Coombes, A. E.
    15037  Comley, S.
    19066  Cooper, T.
    30441  Cooper, W. E.
    23144  Corbett, G.
    13142  Corben, L. W.
    15506  Corby, C.
    14504  Cox, F.
    17450  Cox, G.
    21991  Cox, G. H.
    15339  Cox, W. G.
    17082  Cozens, A. W.
    22155  Cresswell, A. E.
    12656  Critchlow, T. P.
    23347  Cross, V.
    16418  Curtis, J. L.
    26827  Daines, B.
    23313  Daniels, L. G.
    22438  Dann, T. A.
    28721  Dardani, P.
    23025  Darrell, H.
    13362  Davenport, S. D.
    24032  Davidson, T. W.
    25773  Davidson, W. E.
    16199  Davies, C.
    16927  Davis, L.
    26302  Davison, G.
    23029  Dawson, W. J.
    21880  Deade, R. G.
    20416  Deal, J. T.
    17187  Dean, F. J., M.M.
    19120  Dickinson, H.
    18997  Dillon, F. L.
    24838  Dixon, E. B.
    12950  Dobson, J. S.
    27617  Donnison, A.
    13675  Donovan, F. W.
    30407  Dore, S. W.
    16075  Doughty, S. W.
    19619  Douthwaite, G. R.
    16952  Dufty, W. J., D.C.M.
    21651  Dungate, W. J.
    20181  Dunn, W.
    23697  Dunscomb, F. T.
    24525  Dutton, J. T.
    18600  Earnshaw, T.
    22328  Eastham, R.
    23908  Edwards, H. J.
    23243  Elkin, W.
    25839  Ellis, W. T.
    15521  Eustace, G.
    16251  Evans, I.
    26764  Fairhurst, H.
    23159  Farlam, T. H.
    30334  Fielden, E. H.
    27158  Fields, A. H.
    21554  Fisher, F. G.
    16817  Fisher, W.
    20126  Fletcher, H.
    20249  Flynn, M.
    18138  Fooks, J.
    11575  Ford, E.
    13885  Foreman, B. W.
    19115  Foster, J.
    16377  Foster, J. H.
    20811  Fox, W. T.
    11327  Francis, T. W.
    15994  Franklin, F.
    20111  Gard, G.
    16233  Gaskin, C.
    28030  Gibson, T. H.
    22413  Gladstone, T.
    10129  Glover, J. E.
    12628  Goodley, H.
    16906  Gould, J. W.
    14089  Gould, T.
    15470  Gransden, C. E.
    16344  Green, C. H.
    16083  Green, J.
    16568  Greene, W.
    17768  Griffiths, T.
    13092  Groce, F. H.
    17130  Grocott, J.
    21106  Grout, J. T.
    23809  Gunn, J.
    21559  Hales, G.
    18445  Hales, L. W.
    20995  Hall, A. G.
    17157  Hall, H. D.
    20054  Ham, J.
    20328  Hamilton, F. S.
    17359  Hancock, W. C.
    20707  Handley, J.
    16361  Hardstaff, J.
    19862  Hargreaves, A.
    23664  Harris, H. E.
    17086  Harvey, W. H.
    24909  Harwood, G.
    21964  Hassell, F.
    13700  Hawkins, F.
    17445  Hawkins, W. J.
    15979  Hawkswood, R. H.
    16965  Haycock, E.
    22739  Hayes, F. R.
    13006  Hazlewood, R.
    15106  Heath, T. H.
    12806  Hemsley, W.
    22617  Henshaw, T. W.
    23415  Henson, E.
    23015  Hewett, J. F.
    21525  Higgins, H., M.M.
    19617  Hill, C. A.
    17565  Hillman, R.
    25024  Hirons, W.
    31746  Hobbs, A. E.
    17138  Hobbs, C. B.
    13228  Hodges, A.
    14438  Hodgson, M.
    23885  Hoffman, F. J.
    17060  Hollingbery, S.
    23897  Holloway, W.
    26381  Holt, H. S.
    14352  Holton, T.
    14808  Hopkins, C.
    17528  Hopkins, L.
    17290  Hosking, A.
    21136  Hudson, W.
    20896  Huggett, A.
    27223  Hyde, W. J.
     9813  Hyman, C.
    18519  Ingram, G.
    16947  Jacobs, G. E.
    23020  James, W.
     7848  Jarvis, F.
    22130  Jarvis, H.
    10304  Johnson, F.
    26651  Jones, C. T. R.
    14793  Jones, G.
    12539  Jones, S.
    29943  Joyce, A. T.
    12654  Kane, T. A.
    22418  Keeble, G.
    29386  Keen, S. G.
    13633  Kendall, F. A.
    17988  Ketchell, T. C.
    11793  Kettlety, H. E.
    18015  Kings, A. R.
    23480  Kissane, M.
    17596  Kitchen, J. E.
    20552  Kitchener, H.
    21149  Knight, R.
    18421  Lane, F. G.
    22439  Lane, W. H.
    14754  Langford, F.
    22900  Langham, J. L.
    14174  Laughlin, H. J.
    17360  Leach, T.
    25822  Leach, T. A.
    11138  Lee, J.
    19208  Leggott, R. H.
    15661  Lester, W.
     8305  Levett, W. J.
    29136  Lilley, J.
    11349  Litchfield, H.
    22472  Littler, C. W.
    24756  Llewellin, L.
    23210  Lloyd, W.
    12501  Locke, H.
    24996  Long, W. F., M.M.
    20273  Longfield, T.
    23372  Longhurst, H. E.
    20673  Lord, F. C.
    25783  Lord, T.
    16291  Love, J.
    16839  Lowe, L. G.
    20472  Lumley, J. F.
    23672  Lusted, H. V.
    23396  Lyes, J. H. P.
    13922  Lyes, J. W., D.C.M.
    20646  McGuinness, J.
    20061  McHale, W.
    24458  McKenna, H. J.
    18333  McLellan, A.
    29290  Mag, M.
    25844  Major, E. F.
    21334  Maley, T.
    12463  Mankelow, G. A.
    16899  Marbe, A. R.
    22728  March, J. H.
    27035  Marl, G. T.
    16930  Marrows, R. D.
    14378  Marsh, H.
    15704  Martin, C. W.
    29191  Maskell, S.
    22618  Mason, J. E.
    24973  Maycock, F.
    22850  Mead, J.
    16923  Mellor, E.
    11109  Mepstead, A.
    22159  Meredith, E. H., M.M.
    18456  Merrick, T.
    19359  Merrilees, E. G.
    25619  Merry, J.
    17893  Miles, E. G.
    26493  Mills, L.
    11883  Miner, C. G.
    18491  Montague, W.
    20556  Moore, B.
    14052  Moore, H.
    26620  Moore, J.
    24986  Moore, M. M.
    24707  Morley, J. L.
    17028  Morris, W. C.
    22527  Morris, W. G.
    15941  Mosley, V.
    13800  Mottershead, A.
    25819  Moulding, A. J., M.M.
    21384  Munn, A., M.M.
    20976  Munro, S.
    18364  Murfin, A.
    14297  Murrell, W. J.
    30429  Myall, H. L.
    27739  Mycock, J. H.
    30285  Newbury, H.
    21386  Newman, C. V.
    14388  Newman, T. H.
    14624  Nicholls, G.
    27804  Nicholson, C.
    16001  Nisbet, A. C.
    24218  Noon, A.
    17439  Norman, L. C.
    25821  North, E.
    10526  Noutch, J. W.
    26417  Nunn, A. S.
    13734  Odell, W.
    16108  Oliver, G. G.
    17011  Ollerenshaw, J. R.
    25328  Olliffe, H.
    15965  Onion, F.
    16355  Orchard, F. J.
    14867  Orris, T. C.
    26270  Orth, H.
    29345  Outen, G. A.
    21648  Page, J. L.
    14498  Painter, H.
    23205  Palk, S.
    17610  Palmer, A. G.
    18153  Palmer, J.
    11584  Palmer, V.
    17619  Parker, E.
    22150  Parker, H.
    19025  Parker, J.
    15532  Parkinson, E.
    19841  Parr, W. F.
    20174  Parrott, F. H.
    18487  Parsons, P. A.
    29522  Pearce, L. R.
    24047  Pearson, J. C.
    17181  Peartree, C.
    21003  Pell, R. H.
    27980  Pennell, G.
    20957  Perrin, G.
    17012  Perry, J. A.
    17757  Peters, H. F.
    22352  Phillips, W.
    28147  Phillipson, A. M.
    13589  Pilkington, H.
    24736  Pillage, A.
    28300  Place, T.
    13932  Posh, W. N.
    19595  Pratley, F.
    21947  Price, R.
    24876  Prickett, W. G.
    17520  Prickman, H. G.
    23825  Prince, J. W.
    24109  Pullen, W.
    29323  Pybus, H.
    17370  Quinn, T.
    17472  Radford, G. C.
    15402  Radford, S. J.
    12768  Randall, F. C.
    11979  Randall, L. T. R.
    18034  Read, C. S.
    22004  Reece, R. C.
    14577  Reed, A. G.
    12508  Reid, S.
    21528  Renard, A. B.
     9517  Reynolds, F. J.
    19333  Reynolds, J. H. G.
    19643  Reynolds, J., M.M.
    21235  Rhodes, S.
    12246  Richardson, G.
    15006  Richardson, H. G.
    17925  Roberts, F. T.
    16312  Roberts, J.
    28377  Robinson, J. W.
    11602  Robinson, W. H.
    23129  Robson, C.
    26863  Rogers, H., M.M.
    20012  Roome, A.
    24474  Rossiter, F.
    24266  Rowbotham, S. J., M.M.
    16780  Rudman, W. H. W.
    19473  Ryder, J., M.M.
    11917  Sander, L. J.
    14033  Sapsford, A. W.
    25533  Saunders, H.
    23509  Scholes, J.
    23013  Shaw, G. H.
    14921  Shipley, G. E.
    20745  Shorthose, A. R.
    23222  Simmonds, G. W.
    19037  Singer, F. C.
    15346  Slater, W.
    25055  Smith, A. B.
    30401  Smith, A. H.
    15516  Smith, E. J.
    16453  Smith, E. R.
    17076  Smith, F., M.M.
    19494  Smith, F. W.
    19388  Smith, H. P.
    14427  Smith, J. W., D.C.M.
    23494  Smith, T.
    23738  Snow, C. T.
    18998  Southwood, T.
    22602  Spencer, J.
    19003  Spencer, T. R.
    13657  Spencer, W.
    22633  Squirrell, S. A.
    20050  Stanley, H.
    18612  Stannard, G. W.
    16158  Stead, J. E.
    20972  Stebbing, L. C.
    17748  Stevens, F.
    18817  Stevenson, H., M.M.
    20091  Stevenson, T.
    22636  Stevenson, T.
    18218  Stewart, J.
    24187  Stockley, R.
    21169  Stockton, J.
    27284  Stothard, H.
    21228  Strange, W. R.
    15762  Street, F.
    24791  Street, H., M.M.
    27084  Strickland, J. T.
    12136  Studd, J.
    21367  Styles, W.
    26393  Swallow, H.
    32280  Swindlehurst, H. H.
    24472  Tate, C.
    19340  Taylor, A.
    25186  Taylor, H.
    18187  Taylor, R. J.
    15861  Taylor, T.
    15058  Teagle, T., M.M.
    20689  Teasdale, A.
    20104  Tebbutt, E. W.
    18957  Tegg, A.
    21093  Tennant, A.
    18914  Thorpe, A. E.
    16928  Tippett, H. E.
    13468  Todd, T.
    17881  Toms, N.
    24825  Travis, A. B.
    11272  Tuck, H.
    24708  Tucker, W. H.
    17516  Turner, A.
    16637  Turner, C. F. T.
    22188  Turner, C. W.
    21408  Turner, E.
    32326  Turner, W. H.
    22248  Tusler, G.
    13409  Tyne, J.
    18150  Vesey, G. E.
    14348  Vickerman, C.
    28061  Vincent, J.
    16542  Wakefield, T.
    19442  Walker, C. W.
    22480  Walker, E.
    12704  Wall, A., M.M.
    21172  Wallis, F. W.
    16059  Walton, L.
    13559  Ward, R. G., M.M.
    16600  Ward, W. E.
    11546  Washington, W. J.
    23274  Waters, A. C.
    24661  Webb, W.
    22782  Welch, T. V.
    16378  Weller, T. J.
    22966  West, A. J.
    20178  Westmoreland, M., M.M.
    21016  Weston, H.
    23791  Westwood, J. T.
    15728  Wheeler, F. E.
    20024  White, F. A.
    21013  White, J.
    22031  White, J.
    23112  White, J.
    21609  Wilfred, S.
    28735  Wilkinson, E.
    12695  Willetts, L.
    19038  Willett, J. H.
    26492  Williams, A. B.
     8671  Williams, D. J.
    17229  Williams, W.
    18956  Williamson, P.
    19616  Wilson, H. W.
    22110  Wilton, A. J.
    21103  Wincer, G. H.
    25022  Wiseman, A. J.
    17714  Witcher, A. H.
    29408  Wood, A. S.
    21843  Worswick, D. N.
    14444  Wright, W. H.
     9468  Wright, W. J.
    21460  Wright, F.
    18189  Wylie, J.
    24807  Wynne, R. T.
    16746  York, J. E.


                               DRUMMERS

    12607  Abbott, W. T.
    14327  Clark, H.
    13660  Copping, A. A.
    12175  Haines, O. P. H.
    16064  Hook, L. G.
    12302  Jowett, H. A.
    13953  Langrish, A. C.
    16217  Marsden, S. J.
    14367  Roe, E. W.
    14451  Steed, C. S.
    14314  Tomlinson, H. W.
    20649  Wadeson, W.
    15439  Ward, A. E.


                               GUARDSMEN

    16125  Abbott, E. W.
    20947  Abbott, J.
    24805  Abbotts, J.
    29017  Abery, E. S. F.
    17894  Abram, F. C.
    26566  Abram, L.
     9628  Ace, T.
    14095  Acres, J. J.
    17312  Adams, E. G.
    15610  Adams, G.
     9774  Adams, W. H.
    10170  Adby, W.
    14758  Adey, C. A.
    28672  Admans, A. H.
    23368  Adnitt, R. F.
    20338  Alder, A. E.
    22486  Alder, A. F.
    24371  Alderson, R., M.M.
    15232  Aldridge, H.
    15976  Alesbury, F.
    14804  Alexander, A. R.
    23652  Alexander, G.
    16332  Allen, A. W.
    17700  Allen, E. R.
    21888  Allen, E. T.
    17159  Allen, F.
    18543  Allen, J.
    14650  Allen, W. G.
    18298  Allen, W. G.
    30117  Allen, W. H.
    21425  Allerston, J. T.
    18521  Allin, W. F.
    29093  Allison, T. R.
    11452  Allman, F.
    18878  Allport, E. H.
    18480  Allsopp, J.
    25665  Almond, W.
    30483  Amos, W. S. E.
    33690  Amos, W.
    27601  Amsbury, D. P. J.
    25414  Anderson, W. A.
    29300  Andrews, A.
    14422  Andrews, A. J.
    20289  Andrews, E.
    23184  Andrews, H. S.
    18727  Andrews, J. C.
    25322  Angus, W. A.
    16165  Antill, H.
    13737  Anthony, W.
    19215  Appleby, E. F.
    14215  Apps, W.
    30582  Archer, H. G.
    18254  Armison, G. J.
    11516  Arms, C. E.
    18962  Armson, G. E.
    24044  Armstrong, E.
    31543  Armstrong, J. S.
    26696  Armstrong, W.
    16622  Arnall, H.
    20431  Arnold, C.
    19766  Arnold, H. S.
    16467  Arnold, J.
    29217  Arnold, R. G.
    27639  Arrowsmith, I.
    24679  Arrowsmith, J., M.M.
    20531  Ashman, A. J.
    17108  Ashton, J. J
    22398  Ashton, J. W.
    22259  Ashworth, A.
    28758  Ashworth, E.
    27355  Ashworth, G. W.
    20263  Ashworth, I.
    28024  Askey, W.
     9465  Aspin, W.
    13846  Astle, A. E.
    15196  Astle, W.
    21518  Atherton, J. T.
    21661  Atherton, J.
    21579  Atkinson, A.
    19391  Atkinson, A. E.
    31615  Atkinson, A. H.
    27603  Atkinson, G. G.
    16770  Atkinson, H.
    28627  Atkinson, J.
    25978  Attridge, G. S.
    31262  Ault, J. T. F.
    16614  Aulton, C. H.
    27951  Austin, E.
    21259  Austin, G. G.
    12890  Austin, H. S.
    32281  Austin, J.
    13895  Austin, R.
    31130  Avery, F. W.
    17850  Aylott, H. C.
    11679  Ayres, R.
    27349  Ayres, G. E.
    14608  Bacon, A.
    19873  Bacon, T.
    20733  Bagnall, H.
    16750  Bagnell, N.
    13825  Bagshaw, J. H.
    31322  Bailey, A.
    20816  Bailey, C.
    18222  Bailey, E.
    23581  Bailey, E.
    13426  Bailey, E. E.
    22660  Bailey, F.
    30360  Bailey, F. A.
    23070  Bailey, H. G.
    25267  Bailey, J. C.
    26390  Bailey, R. J.
    29015  Bailey, W. E. H.
    30434  Bailey, W. D.
    20514  Bailey, W. J.
    13339  Bain, R.
    18299  Baines, W.
    14748  Baker, A.
    30485  Baker, A.
    28907  Baker, A. C. C.
    15114  Baker, B. H.
    28423  Baker, E.
    26711  Baker, H. G.
    16380  Baker, P. G.
    20333  Baker, R. W.
    17773  Baker, T.
    22500  Baker, T.
    20716  Baker, T. W.
    15092  Baker, W. J.
    25271  Baldock, F.
    23432  Baldry, D.
    24514  Baldwin, C. W.
    28522  Baldwin, S.
    20666  Ball, A. C. J.
    24276  Ball, G.
    16875  Ball, P. H.
    27935  Ball, T.
    11119  Bale, T. H.
    27002  Ball, W.
    31120  Ball, W.
    15080  Ballard, J. G.
    10869  Bamber, E.
    28810  Bamfield, G.
    17403  Bamford, A.
    25858  Bamford, H.
    27889  Bamford, J. H.
    28877  Banks, A.
    22052  Banks, J.
    23164  Banner, J. H.
    24632  Banning, A. J.
    25484  Banton, A.
    15518  Barber, E., V.C.
    24684  Barker, A.
    28546  Barber, A.
    21775  Barber, A. E,
    27882  Barber, B.
    21581  Barber, G. A.
    23605  Barber, J. H.
    18292  Bargh, W.
    20923  Barker, S.
    24833  Barker, J. A.
    25676  Barlow, B.
    30486  Barlow, R. A.
    12115  Barnes, J.
    15972  Barnett, H. L.
    17562  Barnett, G.
    21337  Barr, C.
    27050  Barraclough, B.
    13624  Barrell, C. A.
    26483  Barrett, A.
    22009  Barrett, G.
    16068  Barrett, J. F.
    13284  Barson, C.
    30436  Barter, P. H.
    28356  Bartle, F.
    11843  Bartlett, A.
    25291  Bartlett, G.
    16973  Barton, J. T.
    19650  Barton, J.
    23102  Barton, J. T.
    28255  Barton, R.
    12799  Bartram, E.
    22394  Bassett, A.
    15929  Batchelor, A. H.
    24409  Batchelor, J. H.
    24410  Batchelor, W. T.
    29252  Batchelor, C.
    25095  Bate, J.
    15141  Bateman, G.
    14281  Bates, W. J.
    18359  Bates, F. G.
    17578  Bates, T. P.
    25723  Batstone, J. T.
    14160  Batt, A. R.
    25493  Batt, L. W.
    21865  Battersby, W. A.
    13463  Battle, P. U.
    29854  Bave, E. A.
    25745  Bavin, A. R.
    25611  Baxendale, H.
    17555  Baxter, B.
    21566  Baxter, J. A.
    13940  Bayliss, T.
    26502  Bazett, H. C.
    17300  Beaden, J.
    17346  Beale, C. W.
    28936  Beames, E. R.
    19420  Bean, L. W.
    14527  Beard, G. W.
    25286  Beard, H.
    20753  Beasley, G. W.
     9783  Beauchamp, J.
    22697  Beck, A. W.
    23851  Beck, T. R.
    14939  Beddis, J. H.
    17795  Beddoes, G.
    27430  Bednall, A.
    13048  Beebee, J. H.
    16084  Beech, A. H.
    28620  Beedle, W. J.
    21129  Beeks, C.
    24094  Beeston, T.
    17195  Belfield, T. H.
    22558  Bell, F. M.
    27936  Bell, H. D.
    28466  Bell, R.
    24897  Bellwood, G. W.
    24773  Benford, A. A.
    21374  Bennett, A.
    24628  Bennett, A.
    10707  Bennett, A. G.
    15471  Bennett, A. T.
    27010  Bennett, C.
    17109  Bennett, F.
    21056  Bennett, G. D.
    29985  Bennett, J.
    30157  Bennett, S.
    23627  Bennett, T.
    29085  Bennett, T.
    20361  Bennett, T.
    15445  Bennett, T. E.
    11810  Bennett, W.
    20498  Bennett, W. F.
    14474  Bennett, W. H.
    26820  Bennison, T. P.
    18592  Benson, W.
    27422  Bentley, J. H.
    20123  Bent, J.
    19060  Berkin, S. T.
    22801  Berry, T.
    29012  Berry, W.
    19898  Besant, H. G.
    16295  Besant, W. J.
    11428  Bestley, H.
    20266  Beswick, H.
    19582  Bethel, A.
    23536  Bettles, J. H.
    13297  Bevan, M.
    25480  Bew, E. E.
    13065  Biggerstaffe, J.
    16019  Biggin, A. W. T.
    26448  Biggs, H. G.
    17268  Biggs, J.
    19079  Biggs, J. W.
    14806  Bilbie, C.
    17856  Billingham, J.
    13178  Billingsley, T.
    21539  Bilsbury, H.
    24906  Binding, C.
    20075  Birch, F.
    17343  Birch, J.
    25011  Birch, J.
    24912  Birch, T. M.
    25255  Birch, W.
    12164  Birchley, F.
    27411  Bird, F.
    19768  Bird, W.
    25999  Birkett, W. G.
    29763  Birrell, T.
    22349  Birtles, H.
     9694  Birtwistle, A.
    28739  Bishop, F. W.
    23338  Bishop, R. J.
    15838  Bishop, W. H.
    27672  Bishop, W. H.
    24076  Biswell, S. G.
    29817  Bizzell, F. A.
    17062  Blackburn, S.
    11499  Blackman, H. G.
    17931  Blades, J. P.
    21299  Blair, W. J.
    22407  Blake, F. C.
    16598  Blake, H. H.
    24957  Bland, H.
    25697  Bland, V. V.
    15999  Blanton, J. H.
    27933  Blatchley, A. W.
    20993  Blay, S.
    27658  Blease, W. R.
    15676  Blenkinsop, C.
    23162  Bligh, A. C.
    14391  Bligh, P.
    22938  Bloomfield, T. R.
    28229  Blurton, L.
    24045  Bly, G.
    27747  Blythe, C. E.
    14696  Board, A. F.
    16913  Boarder, F. J.
    18841  Boardman, J. T.
    21355  Boden, E.
    17373  Boden, W. R.
    25244  Boffin, W.
    29340  Bogie, R. L.
    21025  Bolstridge, B.
    26857  Bolt, W. H.
    21583  Bolton, F.
    28395  Bolton, H.
    27328  Bolton, J.
    10946  Bond, A.
    16282  Bond, P.
    15385  Bonfield, R. W.
    18748  Bonfield, S.
    25790  Boniface, R.
    18593  Boon, A.
    18036  Boorer, H. G.
    22367  Boote, J.
    22670  Booth, J.
    23044  Booth, W.
    28921  Booth, W.
    25875  Boraman, P. H. C.
    29716  Borle, J. C.
    29022  Bott, A. H.
    14928  Bottrill, J.
    19899  Boucher, J. C.
    18544  Boult, A. E.
    24808  Boultbee, A.
    16631  Boulton, F.
    13415  Boulton, G.
    20515  Boumford, C.
    18440  Bourke, W.
    27093  Bourne, E.
    25368  Bourton, A. E.
    30554  Bovey, W. P. C.
    29344  Bower, H.
    21540  Bower, L.
    23106  Bowers, J.
    15205  Bowers, J. T.
    22920  Bowes, H.
    21211  Bowes, J.
    26605  Bowler, J. H.
    16022  Bowles, H. F.
    22950  Bowmer, J.
    21133  Bowsher, H.
    20730  Bowtell, W.
    23842  Boyes, T.
    19530  Bracegirdle, A.
    20698  Bracewell, J.
    17984  Brackley, T.
    19738  Bradburn, P.
    18813  Bradbury, H.
    23105  Bradbury, J.
    17447  Bradbury, P.
    29708  Bradbury, S. E.
    21418  Braddock, C.
    23264  Bradford, T.
    28238  Bradley, F. H.
    16403  Bradley, G. H.
    17300  Bradon, J.
     8852  Bradshaw, T.
    29027  Brain, C. A.
    20138  Brain, W. J.
    27540  Braithwaite, H.
    23095  Bramidge, R.
    18695  Brand, L.
    19007  Brandon, J.
    26291  Brant, D.
    12944  Brassington, J.
    17725  Brayshaw, C. T.
    29384  Breach, H.
    19635  Breakspeare, H.
    21281  Breakwell, E.
    19975  Breakwell, H.
    19014  Brearley, H.
     8310  Brennan, J.
    24812  Brett, J. A.
    13747  Brett, J. W.
    14542  Brewer, J.
    27339  Brewis, R. W.
    13021  Brewster, A.
    25744  Brewster, A.
    15646  Brice, J. J.
    20311  Briddon, J.
    18621  Bridgen, J. G.
    25937  Bridges, F.
    26082  Bridges, H.
    22759  Bridgland, E.
    13124  Brierley, A.
    29076  Briggs, G. R.
    32003  Briggs, T.
    20645  Bright, P. M.
     7789  Bright, S.
    14343  Brighton, W.
    10716  Brimson, T.
    18847  Brindley, G. W.
    17179  Brinkman, A. T.
    27939  Britton, S.
    24806  Broadhurst, G.
    29550  Brock, A. T.
    22332  Brocklehurst, T. A.
    16476  Bromage, W.
    23852  Bromwich, J. E.
    28101  Brookbanks, J.
    26442  Brooke, Henry
    16859  Brooker, J.
    18694  Brooker, F. W.
    18655  Brookes, J. E.
    29475  Brookes, T. S.
    24943  Brooks, A.
    19072  Brooks, A. J.
    18934  Brooks, H.
    16805  Brooks, H. J.
    15860  Brooks, J.
    17220  Brooks, J.
    19679  Brooks, J.
    23265  Brooks, W. A.
    26886  Broster, A. E.
    25601  Broughton, S. E.
    11369  Brown, A.
    11811  Brown, A.
    25126  Brown, A.
    30337  Brown, A.
    25606  Brown, A. B.
    22610  Brown, A. J.
    27096  Brown, A. W.
    29545  Brown, B. R.
    12011  Brown, C. D.
    21429  Brown, C. W. T.
    23276  Brown, D.
    19460  Brown, E.
    17400  Brown, F. E.
    10049  Brown, G.
    28248  Brown, G.
    28849  Brown, G.
    18281  Brown, G. S.
    11907  Brown, H.
    19315  Brown, H.
    21531  Brown, H.
    13540  Brown, J.
    18665  Brown, J.
    26085  Brown, J.
    17115  Brown, J.
    15540  Brown, J. A. H.
    24526  Brown, P.
    20542  Brown, R.
    13863  Brown, R.
    16529  Brown, T. G.
    25863  Brown, W.
    28919  Brown, W. G.
    11339  Brown, W. R.
    28995  Browne, G. J.
    26581  Browne, J. M.
    31711  Brunger, F. J.
    20681  Brunskill, J.
    31063  Brunton, T. S.
    29573  Bryan, F. R.
    24457  Bryan, J.
    18447  Bryant, C. B.
    16186  Bryant, H. J.
    24530  Bryce, N.
    26979  Buck, C.
    27243  Buckham, F.
    20216  Buckland, H. C.
    17261  Buckle, F.
    25816  Buckman, S.
    17734  Buggs, A.
    17063  Bull, H., D.C.M.
    22149  Bull, T. H.
    12378  Bullen, H. E. T.
    20108  Bullock, C.
    19047  Bullock, G.
    20283  Bullock, H.
    24517  Bullock, S.
    23294  Bullock, W. J.
    12407  Bunce, F.
    23014  Bunce, F.
    18968  Bunker, J. T.
    30341  Bunker, P.
    16289  Bunnett, H. A.
    24557  Bunyan, J.
    22432  Burden, J.
    30488  Burden, R. J.
    28687  Burdett, T. R.
    11767  Burge, A. J.
    17033  Burge, I.
    18972  Burgin, J.
    23048  Burke, A.
    31062  Burke, J. S.
    16036  Burleton, R.
    31497  Burney, G.
    30587  Burney, T.
    25062  Burr, H. D.
    15348  Burr, S. F.
    20198  Burrell, F. H.
    24578  Burrell, J.
    21866  Burrows, E.
    24153  Burrows, J. B.
    15621  Burrows, W. J.
    20699  Burslem, H.
    13138  Burton, A.
    17796  Burton, A. E.
    17105  Burton, B.
    17095  Burton, E.
    28650  Burton, R. F.
    28422  Burton, W.
    21891  Bush, H.
    23814  Bush, J.
    11356  Bush, P. E.
    13150  Bush, W. H.
    18349  Bushby, J.
    29688  Bushell, A. T.
    22770  Bussey, E. A.
    13199  Butcher, A. E.
    19265  Butcher, C. E.
    25889  Butchers, J. T.
    28889  Butler, F.
    29155  Butler, F. E.
    16963  Butler, F. G.
    12149  Butler, G. H.
    25010  Butler, J.
    17972  Butler, R.
    25564  Butlin, F. S.
    28808  Butt, A.
    16414  Butt, H. J.
    24360  Butterfield, W. S.
    31140  Butterton, H.
    17968  Butterwich, E.
    14584  Button, H. J.
    21152  Button, L.
    22923  Buxton, T.
    11743  Bye, F. T.
    23853  Bye, L. J.
    23368  Bywater, G.
    23598  Cady, G.
    29381  Caffyn, E. H.
    27347  Cain, J. W.
    17092  Calderbank, W.
    22400  Calland, A.
    28635  Callen, E. H.
    29612  Callister, J. L.
    26391  Calloway, W.
    11288  Calvert, G. W.
    27413  Calvert, W.
    14106  Cameron, R.
    13200  Campfield, A. M.
    25471  Campbell, G.
    11694  Campbell, P.
    14558  Campion, J. A.
    24009  Candy, R. J.
    16701  Cannavan, T.
    14292  Cannell, S. J.
    24946  Canner, W.
    15461  Cannon, J.
    18444  Cannon, W. J.
    26859  Capel, A.
    24616  Capewell, S.
    18710  Caple, W. J.
    24761  Capper, R.
    23604  Careless, F.
    28785  Carlton, G. A.
    23400  Carman, E.
    31273  Carmichael, J.
    16338  Carpenter, R.
    26558  Carr, J.
    27040  Carr, W. N.
    29147  Carr, W.
    21585  Carrier, T.
    14564  Carrington, S.
    30357  Carr, F.
    10565  Carroll, J.
    11140  Carson, C.
    21193  Carter, A., M.M.
    29210  Carter, B.
    14618  Carter, C. R.
    15121  Carter, J. C.
    26771  Carter, J. L.
    25188  Carter, O. F.
    18343  Carter, T. J.
    10806  Carter, V. A. B.
    13510  Carter, W.
    26339  Carter, W.
    25120  Cartwright, W.
    28569  Casson, O.
    14301  Catchpole, H.
    14522  Caunt, G. P.
    28048  Causer, W. A.
    18675  Cave, A.
    17898  Caveney, J.
    24589  Chadbourne, A.
    13850  Chadwick, P. E.
    26897  Chadwick, R.
    26802  Chadwick, T.
    25019  Chainey, W. G.
    21036  Challoner, E. C.
    26137  Chambers, C. E.
    21586  Chambers, M.
    25918  Chambers, R. W.
    12829  Chandler, J.
    24712  Chant, C. W. F.
    28962  Chant, J. R.
    18545  Chantler, H.
    13388  Chapman, A. H.
    28974  Chapman, A. T.
    15468  Chapman, E. J.
    26587  Chapman, F.
    20700  Chapman, H. S.
    16431  Chapman, W. A.
    24960  Chapman, W. A.
    17965  Chappell, J.
    15897  Chard, F.
    28797  Charlton, M.
    22687  Charlton, T.
    16386  Charnock, J.
    29387  Chatters, R. J.
    19135  Cheeseman, A.
    19476  Cheetham, J.
    22753  Chesnaye, W. C.
    16305  Chester, F. G.
    22754  Chetter, H.
    24337  Chetwyn, E.
    11072  Cheverton, W. J.
    12610  Chevins, G.
    29399  Chilton, H. W.
    26824  Chilver, E. J.
    31487  Chinnick, C. F.
    18360  Cholerton, G.
    21237  Clack, H.
    21431  Clanchy, H.
    22621  Clapham, P.
    24967  Clapson, F. T.
     9838  Clare, J.
    15228  Clark, C. T.
    18114  Clark, J.
    25208  Clark, J.
    25939  Clark, J. W. F.
    28164  Clark, P.
    26784  Clark, R.
    23635  Clark, R. W.
    17275  Clark, T. S. W.
    24431  Clark, W.
    25342  Clark, W.
    24902  Clarke, A.
    20267  Clarke, E. S.
    20885  Clarke, G.
    14844  Clarke, H. F.
     8231  Clarke, N.
    17623  Clarke, T. J.
    16681  Clarke, W. H.
    17542  Clarkson, J., M.M.
    27148  Clarkson, T.
    25906  Clasper, J.
    21587  Claxton, R. W.
    26340  Clay, T.
    21700  Clayton, G. A.
    26465  Clegg, S. W.
    14488  Clements, B. R.
    14363  Clements, W.
     8151  Clewes, W.
    24375  Clifford, G. J.
    24580  Clinkard, H. A.
    16370  Clissold, W. C.
    28293  Cloak, G. H.
    16398  Clowes, J.
    16393  Clowes, R.
    27047  Clune, L. V. F.
    29949  Clutterbuck, F. G.
    14909  Coates, W. G.
    27512  Coates, W.
    30045  Cochill, P.
    13545  Cockayne, W.
    21145  Cockbill, R.
    12787  Cockle, B. W.
    26415  Coe, R.
    20015  Coker, J. A.
    24087  Coker, J. H.
    19383  Coker, W.
    17177  Colbeck, H.
    16350  Cole, J. W.
     3404  Cole, W.
    16329  Cole, W. S.
    22878  Cole, W. T.
    28521  Coleman, H.
    14800  Coles, G.
    26650  Colley, D. G.
    24893  Collier, E. J.
    15787  Collier, G.
    28874  Collier, I.
    28063  Collins, A. W.
    17110  Collins, B.
    31029  Collins, D. G.
    27190  Collins, E. H.
    13461  Collins, G.
    28041  Collins, R.
     9598  Collins, T.
    23504  Colven, W.
    24561  Comfort, A. H.
    29645  Commander, A. E.
    28370  Condon, F. F.
    18624  Connell, J.
    12337  Connell, R.
    21831  Consterdine, J.
    12793  Coogan, M.
    31820  Cook, C.
    27252  Cook, C. G.
    11918  Cook, E.
    20227  Cook, E. G.
    26674  Cook, F.
    22682  Cook, J. W.
    13425  Cook, P. G.
    26800  Cook, W.
    16644  Cooke, G. M.
    14181  Cooke, P. T.
    22771  Cooke, W.
    22409  Cookson, J.
    25847  Cooley, B.
    11456  Cooling, H.
    16275  Coombe, O.
    29049  Coombs, W.
    26438  Coop, G. W.
    27518  Cooper, A. G.
    13571  Cooper, E.
    21244  Cooper, F. W. A.
    21350  Cooper, H.
    26885  Cooper, O. T.
    21722  Cooper, T.
    16689  Coote, R. G.
    24295  Cope, A.
    24509  Copnall, F.
    30345  Coppard, C.
    18424  Coppard, W.
    18025  Copperthwaite, W. A.
    10845  Corbett, E.
    21444  Corbett, W.
    29126  Cordwell, C. F.
    21356  Cork, C.
    24939  Corlett, A. A.
    24940  Corlett, R. R.
    20834  Cormack, L.
    16311  Cornelius, J. W.
    21844  Cornish, S. E.
    25605  Cornish, W.
    27584  Cornthwaite, R.
    20679  Cornwell, T.
    18854  Corps, A. E.
    20200  Corrigan, G.
    19628  Corrigan, J. T.
    18250  Cossey, J. W.
    19146  Cotgreave, J.
    26268  Cottam, W.
    21859  Cottrell, J.
    26430  Couldrey, F.
    23310  Couling, S.
    23124  Coulthard, A.
    21210  Couchman, A. E.
    27775  Counsell, C.
    18293  Coupe, F. W.
    26089  Coupland, E. C.
    12563  Court, G.
    26247  Cousins, T. A.
    13467  Coventry, J. E.
    20938  Cowens, J. T.
    21061  Cowley, T.
    19921  Cox, A. F.
    30489  Cox, E.
    23575  Cox, E. S.
     9535  Cox, J.
    17550  Cox, J.
    20175  Cox, J. D.
    29826  Cox, S. J.
    12060  Cox, W.
    18093  Coxall, R. W.
    22604  Coxhead, W. A.
    13098  Coxon, T.
    20343  Coy, C.
    31099  Cradock, W.
    27385  Craig, B.
    20627  Crane, C. A.
    25301  Crawford, H.
    11160  Crawford, J. R.
    14017  Creed, A.
    21365  Cripps, A. E.
    16250  Cripps, E.
    22401  Croan, P.
    11614  Crockford, A. G.
    12129  Croft, E.
    22775  Croft, P.
    28033  Crook, E.
    28800  Crooker, D. V.
    24026  Cross, F.
    25522  Cross, G.
    28220  Cross, G. W. C.
    15397  Cross, J.
    28754  Cross, J.
    24664  Cross, L.
    25358  Cross, W. R.
    27982  Crouch, H.
    19455  Crouch, W. G.
    16017  Croucher, W.
    21726  Crow, A. E.
    28046  Crowder, S. F.
    21663  Crowley, E. W.
    24328  Crumpton, E.
    24148  Crundwell, G.
    19539  Cubitt, G.
    21215  Cull, A.
    20453  Cullen, J.
    14122  Cullum, J. S.
    27289  Cummins, J.
    15399  Cummins, R. J.
    25107  Cunliffe, S.
    17114  Cunliffe, T.
    24370  Cunliffe, W. B.
    13033  Cunningham, A.
    19593  Cunningham, H.
     8915  Cupit, J. P.
    18625  Curbishley, H.
    20926  Curtis, B.
    12803  Curtis, E.
    22465  Curtis, J. S.
    14651  Curtis, W.
    25439  Curtis, W. A.
    11185  Curzon, W.
    21892  Cutler, J.
    25132  Cutting, H. W.
    14048  Cutts, M.
    21269  Dabell, A.
    18906  Dadley, R. J.
    26230  Dagger, D.
    23717  Dale, H.
    22807  Daley, J.
    14969  Dalton, A.
    15939  Dalziel, W. G. M.
    24166  Danby, T.
    21893  Dangerfield, S. T.
    27021  Daniel, E. J.
    26000  Daniell, F. G.
    16397  Daniels, D.
    16495  Dann, E. E.
    29842  Dann, F. T.
    24305  Darg, D. B.
    12901  Darlington, G., M.M.
    15859  Dash, P.
    25531  Davey, J.
    25303  Davey, M.
    28149  Davidson, C. E.
    24377  Davie, C. F.
    21936  Davies, A.
    26775  Davies, B. D.
    26772  Davies, C.
    16410  Davies, D.
    20327  Davies, F.
    26439  Davies, O. T.
    28386  Davies, P. H.
    24979  Davies, R. T.
    22084  Davies, T.
    26665  Davies, T.
    16208  Davis, C.
    24117  Davis, E.
    15513  Davis, E. J.
    19384  Davis, G. P.
    23286  Davis, J.
    29052  Davis, J. H.
    18156  Davis, J. S.
    19848  Davis, M. G.
    21096  Davison, R. V.
    15201  Dawe, A. H.
    17207  Dawes, H. L.
    25359  Dawes, T.
    28787  Dawson, A.
    22451  Dawson, G. E.
    15822  Day, A. V.
    18910  Day, E. G.
    22496  Day, H.
    24542  Day, H. W.
    22369  Day, J. H.
    25285  Day, M.
    27237  Day, P. R.
    23557  Day, R.
    22561  Day, W.
    16185  Day, W.
    29267  Day, W.
    20461  Daykin, M.
    12091  Deakin, H.
    32283  Deamer, C. A.
    11442  Dean, F.
    15198  Death, H.
    14657  Deeley, S. T.
    30320  Deem, B. T.
    23786  Delaney, J. T.
    14373  Dell, W.
    28879  Denison, H.
    28320  Denison, J. W.
    24844  Dennis, F. J.
    31641  Dennis, W. M.
    16035  Denny, F.
    27641  Dent, G. N.
    28945  Denton, J. D.
    29513  Derbyshire, H.
    28216  Derbyshire, W. J.
    14545  Devine, J. T.
    13035  Devonshire, D.
    20141  Dibble, R. J.
    17707  Dickaty, C.
    13717  Dickens, H. C.
    24995  Digby, F. R.
    25713  Dignan, W.
    18816  Dill, H.
    19640  Dillon, T.
    25905  Dilloway, G. J.
    14486  Dinham, S. G. V.
    25598  Dipple, G. E.
    31573  Dix, H. V.
    26980  Dixon, C. J. S.
    29112  Dixon, G. M.
    11710  Dixon, J.
    22076  Dixon, R.
    21792  Dixon, T.
    18126  Dixon, W.
    23723  Dixon, W.
    22090  Dixon, W. J.
    18489  Dobbs, H.
    24444  Dobbs, H. A.
    21673  Dobby, H. T.
    24641  Dobson, A.
    12715  Dodd, J.
    16883  Dodd, J.
    31333  Dodd, S. J.
    28406  Dodding, E. G. S.
    23656  Dodman, E.
    16057  Dodsley, W. G.
    18754  Doherty, J.
    24281  Dolphin, G.
    15239  Dominey, S. W.
    16743  Donlan, W.
    20651  Dooley, T.
    24015  Dorey, A. P.
    25722  Dorricott, J.
    29940  Douglas, H. J.
    16626  Dowd, J.
    16306  Dowdon, E. L.
    22138  Dowling, H. J.
    11210  Downing, G. H.
    22497  Dowse, W. H.
    26567  Doyle, P.
    18969  Drackett, C.
    16375  Drain, G.
    18064  Drake, A.
    19757  Drake, M.
    26631  Drakett, W.
    13430  Draycott, W.
    16183  Draycott, W. H.
    25425  Drayton, P. H.
    28295  Dresser, E. E.
    31237  Drew, F.
    25811  Drew, G.
    28459  Drewitt, R.
    22645  Drewry, S. T.
    11183  Drinkwater, P.
    16590  Duckhouse, L.
    23483  Duckmanton, T.
    26416  Duckworth, E. R.
    17551  Duddy, J. L.
    17966  Dudley, D.
    20915  Duffitt, W.
    28604  Duke, R.
     7794  Duncan, A.
    13378  Duncan, P.
    28474  Dunne, J. M.
    11215  Dunning, H. J.
    16464  Durant, L.
    23680  Dutton, T.
    15877  Dyde, A.
    28720  Dyer, A. E.
    15472  Dyer, H.
    25892  Dyer, J. R.
    17383  Dyke, H.
    18065  Eagle, E. A.
    19163  Eaglestone, W. A.
    23643  Ealden, F.
    29008  Easey, B.
    17295  Easley, S.
    16728  East, R. F.
    16425  Easton, J.
    27716  Eaton, E. W. C.
    16270  Eaton, J. H.
    14886  Eaton, W.
    16673  Ecclestone, R.
    15732  Eden, G.
    20583  Edgar, H.
    26149  Edgell, S.
    23967  Edmonds, F. W.
    18450  Edwards, A. W.
    22337  Edwards, A. W.
    17375  Edwards, B.
    11644  Edwards, G.
    27896  Edwards, G.
    25225  Edwards, G. W.
    16769  Edwards, H. J.
    10972  Edwards, J.
    23381  Edwards, J.
    11840  Edwards, J. G.
     4859  Edwards, S. G. L.
    20618  Egan, J.
    16399  Eggenton, W.
    26636  Eggleton, H., M.M.
    16432  Elder, A. G.
    18066  Eldridge, H. B.
    22873  Elford, F. W.
    17597  Elkin, A.
    35214  Elkin, H.
    24189  Elliott, A.
    22823  Elliott, F. R.
     9316  Elliott, R.
    18327  Ellis, A. R.
    27713  Ellis, E.
    25672  Ellison, A.
    22492  Ellson, A.
    17078  Ellwood, E. P.
    17781  Ellwood, W. E.
    25518  Elsey, A. G.
    10501  Elson, J. H.
    24701  Elvidge, A. H.
    31950  Ely, W. C.
    26472  Emmott, L.
    24714  England, R.
    24831  Engley, J.
    23946  Enstone, H. J.
    18094  Entwistle, A.
    30085  Erdbeer, G. H.
    21895  Errington, C. W.
    23418  Errington, R. S.
    16472  Essery, F. W.
    19584  Espley, A.
    22832  Evans, A. F.
    20250  Evans, A. G.
    17912  Evans, A. L.
    15047  Evans, D.
    25838  Evans, E. E.
    21664  Evans, H. D.
     8154  Evans, I.
    23187  Evans, J.
    28408  Evans, J.
    26684  Evans, J. H.
    30561  Evans, J. P.
    23344  Evans, S.
     7851  Evans, T.
    20481  Evans, T. J.
    15735  Evans, V.
    25496  Evans, W.
    27097  Evans, W.
    28707  Evans, W.
    12488  Eve, F.
    16366  Everitt, G. F.
    24289  Evers, T.
    24280  Every, A.
    19623  Evison, J.
    30185  Exton, W. T.
    22454  Eyden, W.
    24820  Eyre, J.
    18144  Eyre, S.
    25735  Fancourt, F.
    29961  Farleigh, E.
    28398  Farmer, R. L.
    18425  Farmer, W. M.
    23527  Farnsworth, J. H.
    14717  Farrell, J.
    20948  Farthing, T.
    22226  Faulkner, J. W.
    28309  Faulks, J.
    20868  Fawcett, M.
    20842  Fawcett, R. G.
    24073  Fayle, D. H.
    24975  Fear, A.
    14081  Fearn, W.
    12754  Fears, A. C.
    14918  Feary, E. B.
    13371  Featherstone, T. C.
    21497  Fell, C.
    28065  Fellender, T.
    28223  Felsted, A.
    26031  Felton, F.
    28334  Fenn, A.
    25683  Fenn, R. W.
    31695  Fenson, G.
    18873  Fenton, E. V., M.M.
    27033  Ferguson, H.
    12532  Few, R.
    27946  Fewtrell, W.
    21982  Fiddies, C.
    26405  Field, J. C.
    24107  Field, W.
    24829  Field, W. J.
    25469  Fieldhouse, G.
    20887  Fields, J.
    22091  Fieldsend, F.
    20345  Figgis, J. B., M.M.
     9187  Final, G.
    33242  Fineran, W.
    25386  Finnamore, E.
    30027  Finneran, C.
    22062  Finney, F.
    26658  Firth, D.
    21635  Fisher, E.
    17604  Fisher, J. H.
    14937  Fisher, R.
    13797  Fitch, H. E.
    11156  Fitzgerald, J.
    10557  Fitzgerald, T.
    21452  Fixter, W. R.
    24365  Flavell, W. C.
    25390  Fleming, W. M.
    20155  Fletcher, A.
    13303  Fletcher, F. J.
    28557  Fletcher, G. E.
    13375  Fletcher, O.
    18512  Fletcher, R.
    26681  Fletcher, S. E.
    30446  Fletcher, W.
    28845  Flook, F. W.
    17254  Flower, J.
    20417  Flynn, J.
    10552  Flynn, T.
    23999  Fogg, H. N.
    11680  Foley, J.
    16847  Foote, O. J. H.
    16625  Footman, T. B.
    18451  Ford, A.
    13676  Ford, C. S.
    15740  Ford, D.
    19174  Ford, F. H.
    31164  Ford, I.
    12286  Ford, J.
    28828  Ford, P.
    20078  Ford, W. H.
    10068  Foreman, E.
    23067  Foreman, W. G.
    27849  Forgan, A.
    18371  Forknell, H.
    20182  Forrester, W.
    11009  Forshaw, T.
    17934  Forster, F. H.
    13884  Forster, J. B.
    16037  Forster, J. S.
    27134  Fortune, J.
    14479  Fosher, A.
    22607  Foster, C. J.
    28382  Foster, F.
    22260  Foster, G. J.
    16438  Foster, H.
    21794  Foster, S.
    17873  Fountain, E.
    20362  Fowler, G.
    22208  Fowler, J.
    18757  Fowler, R. G.
    13324  Fox, E.
    15598  Fox, G.
    29603  Fox, H.
    26369  Fox, J.
    29561  Fox, J. S.
    28747  Fox, M.
    24498  Fox, W. J.
    22103  Foxon, H. J. C.
    29047  Frampton, S. H.
    30227  Frampton, W. F.
    25167  France, H.
    29718  France, W.
    11096  Francis, A.
    28929  Francis, F. C.
    13581  Francis, J.
    21220  Francis, R. C.
    21537  Frankton, W. F.
    17332  Fraser, R.
    24483  Fraser, W.
    26914  Fray, W. S.
    15927  Frazer, W. T.
    20202  Freeman, E.
    16373  Freeman, G. E.
    11740  Freeman, W.
    28913  Freeman, W. E.
    25583  Freer, F. H.
    14912  French, P.
    14035  French, T. F.
    11277  French, W.
    16904  Freshwater, W. G.
    15885  Fretter, H. M.
    29641  Friend, A.
    26192  Frisby, F. T.
    29392  Frost, G.
    28901  Frost, J.
    15455  Frost, W. S.
    27944  Fry, A. C.
    11624  Fry, W. A.
    21739  Fullard, J.
    28341  Fuller, A.
    26560  Fuller, C. H.
    11012  Fuller, J. W.
    20093  Fullman, S. G.
    22444  Fulonger, V.
    28258  Furness, J.
    15902  Furniss, D. L.
    28361  Fyfield, C. M.
    24386  Gaffney, J.
    21002  Gage, L. V.
    28387  Gale, B. A., M.M.
    13859  Gale, G. S.
    14227  Gale, W.
    21860  Gallagher, M.
    22537  Gallear, W.
    17218  Gamble, C.
    21322  Gambrill, F. A.
    23407  Gamlin, F.
    29199  Gamman, S.
    25529  Gane, W.
    13968  Gardiner, H.
    17243  Gardiner, H.
    15044  Gardiner, S.
    21154  Gardner, H. F.
    24144  Garlick, S.
    22647  Garment, W. S.
    29454  Garner, J.
    26157  Garner, R. A.
    29914  Garnett, E.
    31635  Garratt, T.
    25014  Garrett, A.
    21168  Garrett, E.
    20088  Garton, H.
    23873  Garvey, W.
    22487  Gascoigne, A.
    14678  Gates, A.
    20072  Gawthorn, J. E.
    23399  Gaywood, J. N.
    12494  Gee, W.
    25588  Geeves, A.
    27564  Gelder, W. D.
    27968  Gentle, H.
    14816  George, C. W.
    26352  George, J.
    25669  Gibbons, A.
    26961  Gibbons, L.
    18660  Gibbons, T.
    25196  Gibbs, B.
    14214  Gibbs, J.
    15033  Gibbs, W. T.
    26474  Gibson, C. H. B.
    20549  Gibson, J.
    20819  Gibson, S.
    25435  Gibson, W. H.
    15244  Giffen, W. C.
    26372  Gilbert, E. H.
    30399  Gilbert, C. T.
    23502  Gilding, A.
    27316  Giles, W.
    27008  Gilham, R. J.
    28432  Gill, R. H.
    15918  Gillett, F.
    21271  Gillott, W.
    15278  Gilmore, J.
    26500  Gilroy, J.
    15616  Gilson, A. G.
    23465  Gilson, J.
    20565  Gittus, H.
    17875  Gleed, G.
    22355  Glover, H.
    14423  Glynn, J.
    30565  Goddard, A. H. J.
    14932  Godden, D.
    12368  Godfrey, J. A.
    24850  Godfrey, F.
    21545  Godman, W.
    22158  Godsafe, A. E.
    19018  Goff, G. H. W.
    27376  Goldfinch, E. T.
    30338  Golson, J.
    19585  Gomer, C. E.
    22748  Goodacre, S. E.
    17473  Goodall, A. S.
    10236  Goodall, S.
    16080  Goodchild, W.
    31019  Goodchild, L. J. T.
    26265  Goodedge, T.
    15490  Gooderham, G.
    25459  Gooderham, W.
    24621  Goodes, R. B.
    30205  Goodeve, E. A.
    22152  Goodier, H. B.
    18486  Gooding, A. M.
    22599  Goodwin, A. V.
    14929  Goodwin, F. T.
    28618  Goodwin, J.
    29274  Goodwin, J. P.
    15487  Goodwin, P. W.
    15312  Goodwin, R.
    20668  Goodwin, W. J.
    28049  Goom, N.
    25825  Gordon, A.
    23552  Gorton, P.
    18936  Gosling, T. G.
    26322  Gott, J. H.
    14098  Gough, C. H.
    11085  Gough, F.
    11928  Gough, G.
    13034  Gough, F. E.
    24245  Goulding, C.
    23583  Goulding, W.
    30596  Gower, V. A.
    29889  Grace, A. H.
    26111  Gramshaw, E.
    19397  Grant, J. T.
    15155  Gray, F.
    24976  Gray, E. W.
    23036  Gray, H. C.
    24595  Graydon, W.
    20378  Greaves, W. A. G.
    11082  Greaves, W. H.
    29997  Green, A.
    22858  Green, A. E.
    21063  Green, F. G.
    10606  Green, G. H.
    20371  Green, J.
    16205  Green, J. D.
    12758  Green, R.
    27377  Green, S. M.
    30404  Green, T. P.
    27194  Green, W.
    29835  Green, W. A.
    27425  Greene, W.
    25005  Greenland, G.
    27955  Greenough, J. T.
    16123  Greenstreet, J. R.
    21314  Greenway, E.
    23351  Greenwood, A.
    20419  Greenwood, W. A.
    28381  Gregory, J.
    12972  Gregory, J. W.
    23938  Gregory, H.
    25731  Gregory, W. H.
    26579  Gregson, E.
    26043  Gribble, H. C. E.
    17176  Grice, G.
    30773  Griffen, W. W.
    28783  Griffin, C. R.
    28081  Griffin, E. G.
    14313  Griffin, H. J.
    20355  Griffin, M.
    21613  Griffin, T.
    16328  Griffith-Williams, A. F.
    29916  Griffiths, A. L.
    20115  Griffiths, D.
    10442  Griffiths, E. R.
    30016  Griffiths, J.
    25421  Griffiths, P.
    27588  Griffiths, R. A.
    30597  Griffiths, W. H.
    28700  Grime, J.
    27735  Grime, W.
    20919  Grimsdale, H.
    25449  Grimshaw, S.
    24460  Grindley, E.
    28158  Gritten, H. A.
    24264  Grocott, G. H.
    13788  Grooms, E.
    18547  Grove, W. T.
    11477  Grundy, J., D.C.M.
    28327  Grundy, J.
    26663  Grundy, R. T.
    30352  Grundy, W.
    18656  Gunn, A.
    25006  Gunn, A. E. L.
    20229  Guthrie, M.
    30241  Guttridge, C. F.
    22592  Guy, G. R.
    24889  Guy, H. C.
    11099  Guymer, H.
    19419  Gwinnett, H.
    28826  Hack, L.
    21486  Hackett, E.
    28252  Haddock, A.
    20402  Haddow, A. J.
    17102  Hadley, T.
    16993  Hague, H.
    23384  Hague, J.
    26396  Haigh, W.
    28082  Hale, L.
    16919  Hales, G. H.
    21848  Hales, W. J.
    13708  Halfpenny, C.
    24023  Hall, A.
    18513  Hall, A. F.
    26819  Hall, A. W.
    24935  Hall, B.
    13705  Hall, E.
    18649  Hall, E.
    21112  Hall, E.
    16836  Hall, E. A.
    28872  Hall, E. F.
    16392  Hall, F. J.
    21142  Hall, G.
    21570  Hall, H. D.
    22648  Hall, J. H.
    29258  Hall, R.
    27745  Hall, R.
    16179  Hall, W.
    24397  Hall, W.
    23470  Hallam, A.
    18116  Hallam, J. H.
    22818  Hallam, W. T.
    28773  Hallett, H. S.
    21845  Halls, F.
    21756  Hamblin, R.
    23088  Hambridge, S. J.
    13666  Hamer, R. C.
    26695  Hamer, E.
    25654  Hames, W. H. J.
    21217  Hamilton, T.
    26354  Hammond, C. H. G.
    29968  Hammond, F. M.
    12732  Hammond, W.
    24998  Hammond, W.
    17929  Hampson, J.
    12602  Hampton, H.
    27922  Hampton, H.
    15162  Hampton, J. H.
    23769  Hanch, A. E.
    30985  Hancock, L. S.
    28245  Hand, B.
    25317  Handford, J. G.
    16910  Handley, W.
    18227  Hands, A. E.
    17811  Hands, J.
    16091  Handy, J.
    29630  Handy, W. F.
    25170  Hankin, S.
    14760  Hankinson, F. W.
    20257  Hanley, J.
    17576  Hann, F. A.
    20949  Hannaway, J.
    26526  Hansell, A.
    25974  Hansford, C. E.
    24693  Hansford, B.
    25108  Hanson, S.
    24572  Happs, F.
    25097  Harber, J. H.
    17232  Harcombe, F. H.
    16159  Harding, A. H.
    13966  Harding, H.
    17010  Harding, J. G. C.
    23437  Harding, P. T.
    20702  Hardman, J.
    28391  Hardwick, W.
    22780  Hardy, A. T.
    23659  Hardy, F. H.
    12026  Hardy, H. O.
    16771  Hardy, R.
    12864  Hargreaves, F.
    22908  Hargreaves, J. R.
    21728  Harker, J.
    18791  Harkness, F.
    26589  Harlow, C. A.
    21419  Harney, H.
    22918  Harper, A. F.
    25165  Harper, C. T.
    28840  Harper, E.
    21943  Harper, S.
    30041  Harper, W. F.
    17500  Harrick, J. J.
    15978  Harrington, T. A.
     7956  Harris, A.
    22860  Harris, A. E.
    23856  Harris, A. J.
    17675  Harris, C. N.
    16023  Harris, F.
    22649  Harris, F.
    23438  Harris, F. G.
    24721  Harris, H. A.
    29215  Harris, H. W.
    13834  Harris, J.
    14812  Harris, J.
    21099  Harris, J.
    16331  Harris, J. H.
    28284  Harris, S.
    10891  Harris, S. E.
    24259  Harris, S. H.
    28291  Harris, T. E.
    23660  Harris, W.
     8814  Harris, W.
    27916  Harris, W. H.
    24411  Harrison, A. W.
    30232  Harrison, C. H.
    14575  Harrison, C. L.
    30570  Harrison, F.
    10528  Harrison, G.
    25049  Harrison, G. H.
    29680  Harrison, H.
    29380  Harrison, H. P.
    19189  Harrison, J.
    26424  Harrison, J.
    16903  Harrison, J. J.
    22128  Harrison, R.
    27646  Harrison, R. C.
    22824  Harrison, T.
    23770  Hart, R. D.
    29140  Hart, S.
    28034  Hartland, A.
    22415  Hartley, W.
    17785  Hartopp, H. E.
     9840  Hartwell, C.
    13876  Hartwell, H. G.
    18959  Harvey, A.
    29073  Harvey, E.
    20566  Harvey, W.
    15568  Hasell, W. J.
    29171  Hatcher, A. E.
    16611  Hattemore, W. C.
    16161  Hawkes, H.
    16334  Hawkes, T. A. J.
    16449  Hawkins, A. G.
    24735  Hawkins, H.
    19715  Hawkins, R.
    28993  Hawkridge, L.
    25177  Haxton, W.
    25552  Hay, C. E.
    18208  Hayden, W.
    25716  Hayes, J. H.
    19483  Hayes, R.
    32284  Hayhurst, J.
    27859  Haynes, A. G.
    29334  Haythornthwaite, R. W.
    20876  Hayward, F.
    26776  Haywood, T.
    25418  Hazelby, T.
    25419  Hazelby, W.
    16315  Head, L. W.
    25860  Healey, P.
    20081  Healey, R. R.
    23797  Healey, W.
    11258  Heard, W. H.
    18628  Hearn, F.
    16215  Heasman, F. B.
    23699  Heastie, W. K.
    20375  Heath, C.
    27168  Heath, E. J.
    11090  Heath, F.
    23431  Heath, J. T.
    26893  Heath, P. L.
    16178  Heathcote, J.
    28080  Hebblewhite, W.
    17331  Hedge, W.
    21222  Henshall, W.
    11265  Henson, R.
    18318  Henwood, S. H.
    26433  Herbert, C. H.
    29311  Herbert, F. C.
    24782  Herbert, P. C.
    16264  Herbert, S.
    16912  Heritage, E. A.
    23103  Hern, G. H.
    28489  Herrin, J. H.
    20809  Herrington, C.
    22099  Hersel, J. F.
    26513  Hesketh, M.
    28591  Hesketh, T. J.
    29926  Hesketh, W.
    14574  Heslin, J. E.
    17852  Hetherington, A. S.
    28023  Hewes, A. W.
    30087  Hewetson, F.
    21592  Hewitt, C. E.
    27437  Hewgill, J.
    16415  Hewitt, C. J.
    17674  Hewitt, F. T. W.
    26213  Hewitt, J.
    21265  Heywood, F.
    17606  Hibbard, T. J.
    14731  Hickey, T.
    21279  Hickin, A. E.
    13133  Hicks, W.
    22499  Higgins, A.
    28656  Higgins, E. G.
    20794  Higgins, J.
    14554  Higgins, S. R.
    24004  Hignett, J.
    17209  Hill, A. F.
    27969  Hill, A. J.
    16902  Hill, C. D.
    18548  Hill, F.
    10640  Hill, F.
    15388  Hill, F. J.
    21166  Hill, H. W. A.
    11974  Hill, J.
    14543  Hill, J.
    28675  Hill, J. S.
    22252  Hill, O.
    16708  Hill, W.
    22695  Hillier, H. J.
    14315  Hillier, J.
    10684  Hills, F.
    23424  Hilton, F.
    14250  Hind, A. E.
    16152  Hind, J.
    23632  Hind, W.
    27238  Hindle, H. H.
    27640  Hindle, S.
    14884  Hindmoor, R.
    17949  Hine, F. J.
     9027  Hinton, A. E.
    25837  Hinton, E. H.
    24974  Hiron, T.
    14364  Hiscock, A.
    21058  Hislop, H.
    21323  Hitchings, W. H.
    28498  Hobbs, E.
    23562  Hobbs, O. C.
    29035  Hobcroft, H. L.
    12641  Hobson, W.
    26652  Hockaday, J.
    19591  Hocking, J.
    24476  Hodgkin, T.
    22704  Hodgkiss, E.
    18657  Hodgson, J.
    20769  Hodgson, J.
    18209  Hodgson, R.
    26671  Hodgson, T.
    20871  Hodgson, W. H.
    20276  Hodson, W. T.
    30600  Hogg, A. M.
    17422  Hogg, T. H.
    30322  Hoggard, W. E.
    17534  Hoggins, A. E.
    24537  Hogsden, W. G.
    23837  Holden, G. J. W.
    15270  Holden, P. F. W.
    25527  Holden, G.
    26972  Holden, J.
    17922  Holden, J.
    21900  Holden, S.
    23558  Holland, A.
    18277  Holland, L.
    17711  Holland, M.
    24505  Hollins, A. J.
    18045  Hollinshead, J. T.
    22396  Hollis, A.
    23713  Holmes, C. A.
    21938  Holmes, G.
    11604  Holmes, J.
    22375  Holmes, J.
    19166  Holmes, J. H.
    26923  Holmes, M.
    13290  Holmes, S. K.
    28632  Holmes, W.
    16796  Holmes, W. E.
    26637  Holt, F.
    20704  Holt, J.
    22578  Holwill, F.
    10461  Holyoak, E. C.
    25171  Hood, A.
    19052  Hood, J.
    27240  Hooper, H. J.
    11473  Hooton, A.
    20500  Hopkin, T.
    13521  Hopkins, A.
    13406  Hopkins, J.
    16279  Hopkins, R.
    12398  Hopkins, S.
    15683  Hopkinson, W.
    19856  Horler, H.
    25509  Horn, W. G.
    16814  Horne, F. G.
    19673  Horne, J. L.
    18550  Horrocks, E.
    18552  Horrocks, F.
    21266  Horrocks, F.
    23569  Horrocks, H. E.
    17381  Horton, A.
    18086  Hotson, W. E.
    19321  Hough, F.
    20100  Houghton, J.
    25523  Houghton, R.
    24454  Howard, E.
    22666  Howard, F. J.
    26050  Howarth, C. W.
    20435  Howarth, F. H.
    21741  Howarth, J.
    24677  Howarth, J.
    18666  Howell, G.
    28843  Howell, W.
    21381  Howells, F.
    14672  Howes, H. H.
    15235  Hubbard, E.
    10022  Hubbard, H.
    15907  Hubbard, S. H.
    24424  Hubble, G. H.
    21352  Huckin, W. H.
    18111  Huckins, E.
    22165  Hucklesby, G. F.
    26691  Hudson, S.
    11162  Hudson, T. H.
    12492  Huffen, J. H.
    17355  Huffer, C., M.M.
    21256  Huggett, H.
    27505  Huggins, H.
    26734  Hughes, A. C.
    29137  Hughes, C.
    14424  Hughes, D. O.
    31546  Hughes, H. D.
    24608  Hull, W. A.
     8698  Hulley, G.
    25021  Hulme, E.
    21793  Hulse, H.
    19147  Human, A.
    19447  Humphrey, J. H.
    26456  Humphrey, J.
    29425  Humphrey, J.
    21209  Humphreys, A. E.
    24149  Humphreys, F. J.
    19962  Humphries, E.
    16580  Humphries, G.
    17329  Hunt, A.
    19410  Hunt, C.
    26445  Hunt, E.
    25121  Hunt, H.
    13791  Hunt, J.
    18883  Hunt, S.
    15240  Hunt, W.
    27530  Hunt, W.
    28882  Hunt, W. C.
    27111  Hunter, A.
    28153  Hunton, J.
    26643  Hurd, J.
    25231  Huntley, E.
    19532  Hurdus, A.
    19398  Hurst, R. G.
    29057  Hutchings, H.
    31281  Hutchins, T. A. V.
    17599  Hutchinson, S.
    20567  Hutchinson, G. W.
    27139  Hutchinson, P. D.
    29719  Hutchinson, W.
    22911  Hutton, F. B.
    22330  Hyams, H. B.
    28676  Hypson, W. A. T.
    16974  Ibbetson, J.
    27293  Illman, T. G.
    12577  Ince, H.
    25253  Ingham, H.
    27231  Ingham, J.
    26633  Ingham, T. H.
    28339  Ingham, T. W.
    14256  Ingram, A.
    28876  Ingram, C. J.
    30053  Ingram, H. W.
    15020  Ingram, W.
    15223  Insull, R.
    19654  Ions, W.
    14454  Jackman, G.
    26249  Jackson, A.
    26395  Jackson, A.
    27041  Jackson, A.
    16411  Jackson, C.
    17967  Jackson, E.
    27748  Jackson, F. W.
    15292  Jackson, G.
    28292  Jackson, H.
    21999  Jackson, J. B.
    21331  Jackson, J. W.
    17258  Jacques, W.
    10975  Jaggard, J.
    27535  James, A.
    21059  James, E.
    15932  James, E.
    25761  James, F. W.
    18285  James, L.
    15410  James, S.
    14671  Jamieson, C. F.
    30107  Jarratt, J. H.
    22749  Jarvis, A.
    26194  Jarvis, C.
    30505  Jarvis, C. H.
    18965  Jarvis, E.
    22131  Jarvis, E. S.
    28378  Jarvis, J. W.
    24665  Jarvis, S. W.
    23445  Jay, W.
    28786  Jeanes, W. H.
    22842  Jeffrey, H. S. S.
    28037  Jeffries, R. J.
    31482  Jenkins, A.
    18046  Jenkins, A. F.
    24100  Jenkins, A. R.
    29190  Jenkins, H.
    10839  Jenkins, J.
    19148  Jenkinson, W.
    17531  Jennings, J.
    22996  Jennison, J.
    14513  Jessup, H.
    16340  Jessup, H. S.
    23324  Jesty, A. V.
    11925  Jillians, A.
    23209  Jinks, B. G.
    12982  Johncey, F.
    22594  Johnson, A.
    24456  Johnson, A.
    19727  Johnson, B.
    14269  Johnson, C.
    28596  Johnson, E.
    14725  Johnson, F.
    20660  Johnson, F.
    17616  Johnson, F. A.
    15140  Johnson, F. C.
    15594  Johnson, F. S.
    20602  Johnson, G. E.
    22717  Johnson, H.
    28077  Johnson, H.
    31466  Johnson, H.
    28100  Johnson, H. C.
    23000  Johnson, H. W.
    28686  Johnson, J.
    29557  Johnson, J. G.
    25219  Johnston, D. M.
    23272  Johnston, H.
    17849  Johnston, W. A.
    20034  Johnstone, J.
    14610  Jones, A.
    17545  Jones, A., M.M.
    13470  Jones, A. S.
    15443  Jones, C.
    19312  Jones, C. E.
    22441  Jones, D.
    12755  Jones, D. H.
    17720  Jones, D. R.
    16785  Jones, E.
    27310  Jones, E.
    20626  Jones, F. J.
    14814  Jones, F. P.
    12404  Jones, G.
    16985  Jones, G., M.M.
    28017  Jones, G. B.
    22916  Jones, G. T.
    10104  Jones, H.
    22000  Jones, H. W.
    15633  Jones, J.
    22925  Jones, M.
    23830  Jones, M.
    16666  Jones, P.
    14497  Jones, P. M.
     8931  Jones, R.
    16712  Jones, R.
    28589  Jones, R.
    30124  Jones, R. F.
    15061  Jones, S. A.
    13278  Jones, S. G. A.
    28520  Jones, T.
    15211  Jones, T. S.
    14506  Jones, W.
    17661  Jones, W.
    21114  Jones, W. J.
    23354  Jones, W. J.
    24801  Jones, W. W.
    13149  Jordan, E.
    17330  Jordan, A. E.
    22205  Jordan, L. G.
    27591  Jowsey, T.
    13690  Joy, A.
    28628  Joy, H. G.
    18573  Judson, W. T.
    17522  Kane, G.
    17533  Kay, A. S.
    28978  Kay, H. E.
    19051  Kay, N.
    17644  Kay, W. N.
    25365  Kavanagh, A.
    17017  Kear, W.
    27439  Kearney, J. W.
    12718  Kearns. A. P.
    16482  Keay, D. O.
    15843  Keeley, F.
    22904  Keeling, W. T.
    16337  Keen, F. J.
    24061  Keen, W.
    11267  Keenan, J. A.
    13331  Kehoe, N.
    10938  Keightley, W.
    18029  Kelcher, H.
    27045  Kelly, J.
    30187  Kelly, J. E.
    18994  Kelly, J. T.
    12192  Kembry, W. J.
    24072  Kemp, A.
    18827  Kemp, C. J.
    17861  Kennedy, F.
    24390  Kennedy, D. F.
    24717  Kennerley, W.
    27754  Kenny, B.
    21514  Kenshole, J.
    23634  Kent, F.
    13032  Kent, M.
    15414  Kent, P. R.
    15398  Kenward, C. H.
    24091  Kenyon, J. F.
    13706  Kerr, W.
    17908  Kershaw, G. C.
     9704  Kerton, G.
    28110  Keyte, S. G.
    22880  Keyte, W.
    17594  Kibbey, V. R.
    18554  Kidd, G.
    13920  Kidd, H. G.
    17962  Kilbee, C.
    13076  Kilby, W. T.
    12828  King, A.
    11398  King, E. M.
    27851  King, F. W.
    11396  King, G. H.
    24392  King, J. W.
    21340  King, S. C.
    16837  King, T. J.
    20781  King, W.
    14462  Kingcott, H. J.
    18276  Kingham, A.
    12943  Kingston, A. B.
    23607  Kirby, H. C.
    27218  Kirby, E. W.
    13516  Kirkland, S.
    20204  Kirkpatrick, J.
    15948  Kite, T. J.
    27594  Kneale, E. J.
    17860  Knight, A. C.
     8949  Knight, E. F.
    22917  Knight, E. H.
    31202  Knight, G. H.
    30456  Knight, J.
    27642  Knight, J. W.
    14086  Knight, R.
    20749  Knight, T.
    30138  Knott, J. H.
    13550  Knott, L.
    29929  Knowles, E.
    21758  Knowles, J. R.
    22750  Knowles, W.
    26015  Kreiner, R. H.
    29692  Labram, S.
    13704  Lacey, S.
    16838  Lack, W. C.
    12871  Laidlow, T.
    17833  Laird, J.
    26295  Lake, C.
    29703  Lakin, G. A.
    15289  Laking, J. H.
    21541  Lambert, A. E.
    25441  Lambert, H.
    28224  Lambert, W. C.
    27892  Lambourne, L. E.
    12204  Lambourne, W. J.
    18420  Lane, A. J.
    12401  Lane, F.
    24553  Lane, F.
    11344  Lane, J. H.
    11814  Lane, W.
    31731  Lang, H. A.
    21768  Langford, A.
    23764  Langley, C.
    21917  Langton, E.
    15826  Lant, F.
    29925  Larkin, E. S.
    15701  Launder, R. W.
    28280  Law, J.
    19021  Law, R.
    20386  Lawley, W.
    19972  Lawlor, J.
    22363  Lawrence, A.
    26008  Lawrence, F.
    23097  Lawrence, G. H.
    15464  Lawrence, J.
    12197  Lawrie, W.
    26185  Laws, A. F.
    21335  Laws, J. J.
    17936  Lawson, H.
    17938  Lawson, J.
    23173  Lawson, L. A.
    23155  Lawton, J.
    28268  Layton, S. M.
    13905  Leach, A.
    19902  Leach, J.
    20085  Leach, J.
    27042  Leaman, F.
    20675  Lears, J.
    20714  Leathers, C. V.
     8912  Leckey, A.
    19637  Lee, A.
    23650  Lee, A.
    24510  Lee, F. C. W.
    23682  Lee, G. C.
    18195  Lee, H.
    26552  Lee, R. S.
    21097  Leech, J. Y.
    13695  Leek, H. G.
    15700  Leek, L.
    29072  Leeming, R.
    24308  Lees, M.
    12435  Leeson, A.
    14528  Leonard, A. F.
    12388  Leonard, B.
    23135  Letchford, G. A.
    29437  Letherbarrow, A. A.
    31944  Letting, T. L.
    30459  Letts, W. H.
    17188  Lewenden, E. J.
    23674  Lewin, W. J.
    21742  Lewington, W. C.
    16197  Lewis, A.
    22953  Lewis, A.
    24594  Lewis, G. W.
    10495  Lewis, J.
    15428  Lewis, N. W.
    17386  Leyland, W. B.
    16038  Lightfoot, A.
    10858  Lightfoot, I.
    12677  Lightfoot, T.
    20576  Lightwood, C.
    16841  Lilley, E. G.
    27125  Lillington, S. F.
    18715  Lincoln, A.
    28141  Lindley, H.
    27156  Lindley, S.
    16863  Lindop, H.
    21479  Linford, G. H.
    29356  Link, O. L. E.
    16322  Linton, P.
    19020  Lintott, G. T.
    24611  Lister, A.
    12761  Litchfield, E.
    30221  Litchfield, W. H. G.
    13992  Little, E. J.
    19750  Little, R.
     9651  Littlehales, J.
    13433  Llewelyn, E.
    27994  Lloyd, E.
    27323  Loader, R.
    22667  Lock, F.
    27006  Locker, T.
    22055  Lockett, H.
    21302  Lockwood, J. H.
    18966  Lockyer, H.
    29180  Loder, R. O.
    14113  Logan, P.
    27528  Lomax, J.
    14308  Long, E. W.
    17770  Longden, T.
    19324  Longhurst, I. R.
    20569  Longley, H. H.
    15396  Longley, J.
    11858  Longmore, E.
     7838  Longmore, W.
    26871  Longshaw, A.
    26547  Longworth, T.
    31825  Loomes, J.
    12843  Loosley, W. R.
    21213  Lord, R. W.
    29040  Lott, E. V.
    27127  Loughton, F. G.
    22741  Loughton, J.
    21685  Loveday, E. G.
    24848  Loveday, J.
    28183  Lovell, S. J.
    15943  Lovell, T.
    23758  Lovelock, J. A.
    21341  Lovesey, T. M. O.
    26152  Lovett, F. W.
    20303  Lowder, W. L.
    29935  Lowe, G. R.
    20620  Lowe, J. W.
    21597  Lowe, P.
    22402  Lowes, A.
    20406  Lowman, L. A.
    28823  Ludgate, A. W.
    24202  Ludlow, H. L. E.
    28352  Lugard, H. A.
    28011  Lunt, J.
    15854  Luxmore, W.
    28244  Lyddon, F. W.
    15953  Lymer, T.
    20381  Lynn, W. M.
    17729  Lythgoe, R.
    12284  Mabbutt, E.
    29803  McAllister, A.
    15788  McArdle, W.
    21903  McCabe, T.
    16207  McCarthy, J.
    19222  McDonald, J.
    25051  McDonald, P.
    24304  McGann, F.
    10853  McGillivray, A.
    15013  McGinn, T., M.M.
    17951  McIlwain, W.
    26817  McKevitt, H. E.
    24702  Macklin, W.
    27022  McKnight, H.
    19690  McNeil, W. T.
    16254  McPhie, A.
    19990  McManus, M.
    26061  McQuaigue, A. C.
    21394  McShane, E.
    27307  Madden, F. H.
    13847  Madden, J.
    22457  Madden, J. A.
    12557  Maddison, F.
    26611  Madge, F. W. S.
    18220  Maguire, E.
    19513  Maiden, C. R.
    26907  Maiden, J. E.
    29092  Maides, F. J.
    25542  Maidlow, A. J. A.
    26994  Major, R. F.
    19947  Maker, F. W.
    31363  Makins, A.
    16659  Mallender, P.
    19598  Mallin, F. L.
    27770  Mallows, W. E.
    10665  Mandeville, J.
    20292  Mann, A. W.
    23939  Mann, C. E.
    26717  Mann, L.
    21480  Manning, A.
    22862  Manning, C.
    16789  Mannion, W.
    28492  Mansell, J. E.
    12851  Mansell, S.
    17862  Manuel, H. L.
    18808  Maple, J. E.
    18762  Mapstone, B.
    23955  Marcer, C.
    22215  Marchant, H. D.
    11669  Marks, P.
    18212  Markwick, A. V.
    26027  Marriott, W. H.
    23186  Marrison, F.
    29062  Marsden, F.
    26516  Marsh, E. C.
    25597  Marsh, F.
    24650  Marsh, G. A.
    26847  Marsh, H. E.
    23090  Marsh, S. C.
    13381  Marshall, G.
    15952  Marshall, G. W.
    17662  Marshall, L.
    32134  Marshall, T.
    20595  Marshall, W.
    21562  Martin, H.
    14923  Martin, J.
    21946  Martin, R. D.
    25142  Martin, R. O.
    25854  Martin, S. C.
    25130  Martin, W.
    20035  Martin, W.
    23989  Martin, W. H.
    30509  Marvell, W.
    21578  Maslin, C.
    26797  Mason, H.
    15283  Mason, S. J.
    28524  Masters, A. P.
    10930  Masters, E. G.
    12941  Matcham, E.
    21695  Mather, J.
    21902  Mather, W.
    27744  Matson, G. W.
    21877  Matson, W. D.
    15729  Matthews, C.
    28756  Matthews, H. E. T.
    21158  Matthews, J.
    23450  Matthews, J. E.
    12816  Matthews, W.
    21157  Matthews, W. J.
    23898  Mattich, R. J.
    13997  Maule, W. S.
    31494  Mawer, R.
    17787  May, E.
    16607  May, F.
    14794  May, H.
    16582  May, S. V.
    14646  Mayell, W. F.
    24890  Mayo, E. W.
    25681  Mayo, R. F.
    15869  Mead, A.
    27629  Mead, A.
    14508  Meadows, W. H.
     9303  Mears, E.
    18630  Meech, W. E.
    29624  Meeking, J. A. A.
    14226  Melia, J.
    20426  Mellanby, J.
    18686  Mellon, J.
    18977  Mellor, J.
    18437  Mellors, G.
    19699  Melton, E.
    19897  Melville, A.
    14481  Melville, W.
    14940  Mendorf, A. W.
    20879  Mepham, J. H.
    24746  Meredith, G.
    13849  Merritt, A.
    11441  Merritt, S.
    27797  Merry, W. E.
    10000  Message, E. V.
    20211  Metcalf, T. H.
    12234  Michael, E.
    20920  Micklewright, C. H.
    24142  Middlemiss, J. L.
    14164  Middleton, W.
    24384  Milburn, R.
    22473  Milburn, W.
    25967  Miles, A. J.
    23181  Miles, C. J.
    13040  Miles, G.
    34561  Miles, J. H.
    28230  Miles, W. C.
    10164  Miller, J. W.
    15380  Miller, F.
    26929  Miller, H. E. B.
    27102  Miller, M.
    19123  Millichamp, B.
    18379  Millins, F. J., M.M.
    14336  Mills, G. T.
    26568  Mills, J.
    16313  Mills, T.
    16049  Mills, W.
    10581  Millward, S.
    23845  Milner, F.
    15010  Milton, J. T.
    23417  Minchin, B. R.
    15996  Ming, H. W.
    14466  Mitchell, S.
    10608  Mitchell, T.
    29482  Mitchinson, G. D.
    24372  Mitton, W.
    13817  Mizon, G.
    16005  Mobley, N. W.
    15528  Moffitt, P.
    23297  Moger, T. G.
    14448  Moisey, C. A. V.
    26690  Mole, A. E.
    15497  Mole, S. J.
    25163  Monk, A. M.
    16946  Moody, H.
    17398  Mooney, J.
    23865  Moore, A.
    14339  Moore, E.
    18764  Moore, F.
    17015  Moore, G. J.
    29885  Moore, H. B.
    28195  Moore, J. H. S.
    23799  Moore, S.
    31336  Moore, S.
    22002  Moore, T.
    28526  Moores, R. C.
    21835  Morcell, B.
    20988  Morgan, C. E.
    28044  Morgan, D. H.
    24683  Morgan, F.
    16292  Morgan, G.
    16479  Morgan, H. J., D.C.M.
    12422  Morgan, P.
    12980  Morgan, P.
    15403  Morgan, S.
    27923  Morgan, W.
    22945  Morley, E. C.
    19155  Morley, H.
    29013  Morphew, E.
    21835  Morrell, B.
    21395  Morrey, H.
    12666  Morris, A.
    29018  Morris, A.
    12235  Morris, E.
    24082  Morris, H.
    15520  Morris, S.
    13969  Morris, S. B.
    26883  Morris, T.
    12080  Morris, T. S.
    23516  Morris, W.
    15419  Morris, W. J.
    28451  Mort, J. W.
    25932  Mortimer, A. G.
    12589  Mortimer, A. W.
    24364  Mortimer, R.
    28664  Moss, D.
     9418  Moss, J.
    18072  Mott, W. A.
    28445  Mottram, T.
    30460  Mould, E. J.
    20810  Mould, J. A.
    15916  Moule, J. W.
    12390  Moulson, W. H.
    17406  Mountain, A. E.
    29118  Mowbray, F. C.
    31050  Mowbray, W. T.
    15157  Mullins, H. S.
    18213  Mullis, S. E. J.
    19739  Mumford, P.
    28807  Munday, A. C. T.
    27789  Munton, A. W.
    13520  Murden, D.
    27516  Murphy, A. E.
    17235  Murphy, C.
    19309  Murphy, J.
    14738  Murphy, M.
    28306  Murray, T.
     8720  Murray, W.
    13060  Murtagh, P.
    29797  Murton, A. E.
    15489  Musgrove, F.
    14398  Nash, F. T.
    14551  Nason, H. E.
    22475  Nathan, W. H.
    26813  Nattrass, C.
    27297  Naylor, J.
    21812  Naylor, T., M.M.
    16893  Neal, F. A.
    27498  Neal, J.
    21084  Needham, L.
    25042  Needham, T. A.
    24366  Needle, R.
    20599  Neighbour, F.
    21862  Nelson, J. W.
    13438  Nelson, T.
    27630  Nendick, J. E.
    15519  Nessling, W. J.
    26622  Nethercott, R. A.
    21813  Nettleton, W.
    17997  Nevard, H. W.
    17465  Neville, J.
    25520  Newby, W. P.
    16960  Newell, B. J.
    27369  Newell, S. F.
    21065  Newman, C.
    12868  Newman, F. G.
    17378  Newman, S.
    27753  Newman, W.
    29744  Newnham, B.
    29896  Newton, R. C.
    28487  Newton, T.
    15884  Newton, W.
    26254  Nichol, J.
    20234  Nichols, C. N. C.
    29276  Nicholls, J. C.
    27043  Nicholls, P. S.
    15928  Nicholls, T.
    27250  Nicholson, F.
    15733  Nicklinson, J.
    25521  Nickolls, P. J.
    23693  Nightingale, H.
    27743  Nightingale, H. A.
    18048  Noakes, A.
    16301  Nobes, C.
    31595  Noble, E. S.
    23657  Nolan, W.
    25576  Norman, C.
    17405  Norman, N. E.
    28751  Norminton, H.
    22857  North, A.
    23668  North, A.
    22814  North, J.
    14191  Nunn, A. E.
    19209  Nutkins, F.
    15039  Nutley, C.
    25586  Nuttall, J. O.
    30073  Nuttall, W.
    24766  O'Brien, W. B.
    11239  O'Connor, P.
    11702  O'Neill, M., M.M.
    29946  O'Neill, T.
    18767  O'Reilly, H.
    30290  Oakey, G.
    24734  Oakley, C. D.
    22210  Oddy, V.
    24362  Odell, H.
    16938  Offord, S. V.
    25928  Oglesby, J.
    16788  Okey, D. J.
    13655  Oldershaw, H.
    20214  Oldham, A.
    19626  Oldham, J.
    15167  Oldham, J. W.
    20933  Oldring, H. J.
    16300  Oliver, A. V.
    31478  Oliver, F.
    31739  Oliver, G.
    30076  Oliver, J. A.
    21474  Oliver, J. W.
    14272  Oliver, P.
    16104  Onions, T. H.
    17537  Orams, F. S.
    25777  Orange, H.
    29352  Orpin, C.
    13235  Orr, C.
    25515  Osborn, E.
    27810  Osborne, G. W.
    28580  Otterwell, S.
    24345  Oulton, D. A.
    31096  Over, E. A.
    24901  Owen, F.
    10329  Owen, J.
    28210  Oxenham, T.
    28477  Oxley, H. S. P.
    14131  Oxley, P.
    24883  Packer, C. H.
    15437  Packer, R. T.
    21422  Page, H.
    24555  Page, J. N.
    16457  Page, N.
    15342  Painter, J.
    22663  Painter, J.
    26232  Palmar, H. J.
    27452  Palmer, A.
     6260  Palmer, C. W.
    15501  Palmer, G.
    24868  Palmer, H.
    15024  Palmer, J. B.
    25797  Palmer, W. P.
    24262  Paradine, A.
    25642  Parfitt, A. L.
    16290  Pargeter, G.
    26714  Park, H.
    26586  Parke, H. F.
    29589  Parker, F. L.
    20544  Parker, G.
    20068  Parker, H.
    29696  Parker, H. J.
    29069  Parker, H. G.
    17106  Parker, J. F.
    31646  Parker, R.
    17804  Parker, W.
    26803  Parker, W.
    27419  Parker, W.
    22585  Parker, W. J.
    24681  Parkin, J. A.
    30531  Parkins, W. R.
    15189  Parkinson, A., D.C.M.
    27560  Parkinson, S. S.
    30613  Parkinson, E.
    21194  Parks, G. S.
    12025  Parks, H.
    13194  Parris, A. L.
    16272  Parsons, F.
    24695  Parsons, H. G.
    24671  Parsons, R.
    18050  Parsons, S.
    18336  Parsons, W. A.
    12522  Partridge, J.
    28290  Partt, S.
    28748  Parvin, A. W.
    28507  Pascoe, A. H.
    11234  Pashley, J. F.
    19864  Patient, A.
    20971  Patman, F. J.
    22926  Patrick, G.
    15709  Patten, F. G.
    14735  Pauli, F. G.
    16918  Paul, A.
    15268  Paxton, A.
    15890  Pay, J.
    41410  Payne, C.
    23683  Payne, W.
    24017  Payne, W.
    13294  Peace, G.
    20226  Peacher, H.
    23610  Peacock, F.
    26966  Pearce, A. J.
    29042  Pearce, C. M.
    15534  Pearce, D. H.
    11216  Pearson, G.
    25880  Pearson, J.
    28076  Pearson, J. D.
    27232  Pearson, J. N.
    24267  Peate, W.
    22477  Peck, A. W.
    29442  Peckitt, E.
    25921  Peel, A. J.
    22170  Pegg, G. W.
    24955  Pegg, J.
    16135  Pellett, C. J.
    15463  Pendle, F. J.
    30513  Penn, W. C.
     8363  Percival, W. M.
    24547  Perkins, P. W. A.
    23972  Perkins, R. T.
    20570  Perkins, W.
    21717  Perkins, W. J.
    28226  Perks, A.
    20351  Perks, F. H.
    17468  Perrett, E.
    27087  Perry, H. J.
    13054  Perry, W. A.
    13418  Perryman, A. O.
    22202  Perryman, J.
    25915  Peters, R. A.
    28988  Pettitt, H.
    11360  Petts, G.
    13572  Phillimore, S.
    28825  Phillips, A.
    21328  Phillips, T. M.
    23392  Phillips, W. A.
    26686  Phillips, W. C.
    24778  Phillipson, M.
    17745  Phipps, E. W.
    14125  Pickard, C.
    21510  Pickard, G. A.
    18118  Pickering, W.
    27997  Pickford, E.
    27228  Pickles, H.
    29588  Pickles, W. A.
    28634  Pidgeon, F.
    24846  Piggott, J.
    26729  Pike, A. P.
    20477  Pike, M. J.
    24462  Pike, R. H.
    29014  Pike, T.
    19812  Pike, T.
    28260  Pilch, T.
    26296  Pinkney, T. W.
    27011  Pinnington, W.
    27397  Piper, G.
    12346  Piper, H.
    26715  Pipkin, H. J.
    26539  Pirie, J.
    24740  Pitcher, C. J.
    25360  Pitcher, J.
    18196  Pittaway, J. W.
    24794  Plackett, F. S.
    18955  Plant, B.
    13715  Player, A. H.
    14372  Playsted, W. J.
    22652  Plumb, H.
    28476  Plumb, H.
    12443  Plummer, L.
    22216  Plummer, E.
    26013  Plummer, E. J., M.M.
    17338  Podmore, E.
    21032  Pointon, W.
    22819  Pole, D.
    26844  Pollard, G.
    17341  Pollard, J. F.
    14838  Pollard, O. P.
    20454  Pollington, H., M.M.
    20185  Poole, A.
    14715  Poole, G.
    17423  Poole, J. C.
    22217  Poole, W. W.
    17283  Porter, H. W.
    28605  Porter, J.
    24359  Porter, J. P.
    22555  Potter, A. F.
    14628  Potter, F.
    27526  Potter, J. L.
    25487  Potter, W.
     9193  Potts, G.
    24660  Potts, T.
    11256  Pouncett, A.
    29959  Powell, C. W.
    24536  Powell, E. G.
     8674  Powell, F. W.
    19642  Powell, G.
    23740  Powell, J.
    29893  Power, C. H.
    21563  Powlesland, J. W., M.M.
    23045  Pratley, H.
    21906  Pratt, P.
    15708  Predith, O.
     8549  Preece, C.
    27919  Prentice, J. W.
    24240  Prescott, P.
    28680  Prescott, P.
    18634  Prescott, W.
    13894  Press, T.
    28603  Prestidge, J. W.
    13035  Preston, W. C.
    30512  Pretty, R. J.
    20593  Price, G.
    15453  Price, H. G.
    29115  Price, J. J.
    23926  Price, P.
    18705  Price, R.
    25706  Price, R.
    18365  Price, T.
    28389  Price, W. B.
    18960  Priddy, R.
    23008  Priest, A.
    20358  Priest, W. C.
    22171  Priestley, A.
    28427  Priestley, H. P.
    26349  Priestley, N.
    15405  Priestley, W. E.
    25517  Prior, A. C.
    17404  Prior, G. D.
    30463  Prior, J. O.
    23785  Prior, J. T.
    23534  Prince, A.
    28431  Prince, P. W.
    26253  Pritchard, G. F.
    25621  Pritchard, S. C.
    29161  Pritchett, H.
    22653  Proctor, J.
    23807  Proudlock, C. W.
    18766  Prudames, H. R.
    27431  Pugh, E.
    22595  Pugh, E. J.
    10527  Pugh, J.
    25299  Punt, G. E.
    22133  Purchase, W. J.
    27506  Purton, A. W.
    21126  Pusey, A.
    16604  Pusey, R. G.
    18738  Quick, C.
    33311  Quigley, G. R.
    16835  Rackham, R.
    20224  Radford, A.
    26680  Railton, W.
    22654  Rainbow, H.
    20056  Ramsdale, A.
    17035  Ramsey, J.
    19815  Ransome, F.
    29188  Rapley, A. W.
    28364  Ratcliffe, B. S.
    27242  Ratcliffe, J.
    21359  Rathbone, J.
    13066  Ravening, M. A.
    17496  Rawle, W.
    30948  Rawley, A.
    18672  Rawlins, C. W.
    29422  Rawlins, G.
    18541  Rawlinson, R.
    28068  Ray, F. W.
    25758  Rayment, R. G.
    13564  Rayner, P.
    18899  Rayner, W.
    20281  Rayner, W. D.
    19567  Read, G.
    27175  Read, G. S.
    24178  Reader, H.
    26848  Reading, S. R.
    17119  Reaney, M.
    20636  Redfern, W.
    13404  Redgate, S.
    20180  Redshaw, G. A.
    16929  Reece, A. E.
    20248  Reed, A. E.
    11221  Reed, J. O.
    15695  Reeves, E. M.
    20499  Reeves, W. H.
    20274  Regan, F.
    11199  Reid, A. E.
    14446  Revill, A.
    20102  Revill, F.
    12555  Reynolds, A. J.
    22778  Reynolds, F.
    28157  Reynolds, R.
    14848  Reynolds, W.
    28111  Rhodes, A. J.
    16989  Rhodes, G. T.
    22491  Rhodes, J.
    29391  Rhodes, L.
    17429  Ribbans, G.
    21137  Ribbons, H. T.
    22016  Rice, E.
    29448  Rice, F. H.
    18556  Richards, A.
    16480  Richards, D. J.
    20822  Richards, H.
    24480  Richards, W. E.
    18609  Richardson, C.
    12426  Richardson, F.
    21247  Richardson, R.
    26629  Richardson, S.
    23217  Richens, A.
    24429  Richens, F.
    22285  Riches, E. C.
    15172  Richings, W. C.
    24884  Rickard, H.
    26752  Richmond, E. E.
    26427  Riddle, F. N.
    17694  Riddoch, A.
    17282  Rider, W. G.
    24340  Ridgway, H.
    11054  Ridout, G.
    31620  Riley, D.
    24642  Riley, H.
    20006  Riley, J.
    21605  Rimmington, J.
    12519  Ringer, H. R.
    24147  Risden, W.
    17484  Ritson, N.
    16212  Rivers, A. L.
    12947  Rivers, W.
    16072  Roach, B. A. F.
    11929  Roadley, H.
    18503  Roache, G.
     7649  Roadnight, F.
    22568  Roan, C.
    22343  Robbins, R. I.
    10305  Robbins, S.
    23564  Robbins, W.
    13792  Roberson, W. J.
    26211  Roberts, A.
    22596  Roberts, A. B.
    28358  Roberts, E. W.
    17271  Roberts, E. J.
    19835  Roberts, G.
    12495  Roberts, H.
     9919  Roberts, J.
    13372  Roberts, J. B.
    25796  Roberts, O. W.
    16680  Roberts, R.
    18739  Roberts, R. E.
    16427  Roberts, R. J.
    17715  Roberts, T.
    18296  Roberts, W. A.
    20352  Roberts, T.
    25018  Roberts, W.
    14582  Robins, W.
    15465  Robinson, A. S.
    22435  Robinson, C.
    20482  Robinson, C. H.
    22313  Robinson, E.
    18297  Robinson, F.
    22479  Robinson, J. R.
    19506  Robinson, J. W.
    23883  Robinson, R.
    27724  Robinson, R. G.
    20428  Robinson, S.
    13913  Robotham, G. A.
    17319  Robson, A. W.
    27200  Robson, W. C.
    11648  Roddis, C. A.
    25488  Roden, G. W.
    27554  Roe, A.
    21062  Rodgers, E.
    23810  Rogers, J. J.
    15060  Rogers, P. J.
    20554  Rogers, S.
    24461  Rogers, T.
    20678  Rogers, W.
    27884  Rollinson, W.
    25335  Rolfe, G.
    19850  Rolfe, J. J.
    26922  Rooke, A. F.
    15290  Rooke, F. J.
     8765  Roome, E. W.
    21908  Rooney, W.
    19070  Roscoe, W. H.
    24656  Rose, C. W.
    25833  Rosie, W. C.
    20539  Rossiter, O., M.M.
    26915  Rothwell, W.
    16253  Roughton, L.
    28371  Rouse, A.
    24177  Rouse, W. H.
    16936  Rousseau, J. G. P.
    13369  Rout, R. J.
    24826  Rowarth, H.
    13760  Rowbottom, E.
    20705  Rowe, P. L.
    16978  Rowley, J. J.
    20507  Rowley, J.
    26154  Rowley, T.
    26693  Rowley, T.
    26186  Rowse, W. G.
    29331  Rowson, T. H.
    25658  Roytherne, A.
    22007  Rudd, C. H.
    17088  Ruff, B.
    29064  Runge, E.
    17487  Russell, A.
    17739  Russell, C. E.
    23700  Russell, D.
    26865  Russell, H.
    26359  Russell, J.
    11481  Russell, M.
    22027  Russell, R.
    27142  Rutherford, G.
    29957  Rutherford, W.
    31259  Rutter, T.
    20604  Rutter, W. H.
    28436  Ryall, F.
    22234  Ryan, C.
    17590  Ryde, C. F.
     9876  Ryles, W.
    21621  Sadler, R.
    14180  Sage, J.
    26614  Saint, W. H.
    31463  Sales, H.
    20236  Salmon, F. E.
    27475  Salmon, J. W.
    11581  Salsbury, J.
    29248  Salter, S. G.
    11731  Sampson, A. E.
    16177  Sampson, W. G.
    30044  Sampson, F.
    34307  Sampson, S.
    16691  Sanders, W.
    22669  Sanderson, A.
    18408  Sansom, F. J.
    17538  Sargent, C. D.
    15840  Sargent, G. A.
    16452  Sargent, P. J.
    17916  Sarsfield, W.
    27619  Saunders, H. R.
    14165  Saunders, J., M.M.
    29892  Saunders, W.
    18367  Savage, W.
    17361  Savile, J.
    29059  Sawer, A. W.
    28150  Sawyer, A. W.
    29009  Sayers, D. E.
    19863  Scambler, W. M.
    26744  Schofield, C. V.
    16914  Scollard, E. J.
    30335  Scott, A.
    24706  Scott, A. W.
    13599  Scott, E.
    22235  Scott, H.
    20082  Scott, J.
    24217  Scott, J. T.
    25466  Scott, J.
    25352  Scott, J. H.
    21118  Scott, S. W.
    27478  Scott, Wm.
    12576  Scripps, A.
    26623  Scudder, W.
    27636  Scull, S.
    28652  Seabrook, A.
    19452  Seabrook, A. M.
    14004  Seagraves, C.
    26675  Seajeant, J.
    22305  Sedgley, A. J.
    14134  Selby, H. C.
    24712  Seely, J. M.
    17581  Seewald, F.
    25356  Self, F.
    16042  Senior, A. E.
    12226  Sentence, H.
    26818  Sergeant, H. C.
    15160  Sergeant, J. C.
    15680  Sergent, T.
    13593  Setterfield, H.
    24123  Settle, W.
    21503  Severn, J.
    24319  Sewell, J.
    28021  Seymour, G. B.
    16126  Seymour, H. C., M.M.
    16851  Seymour, L.
    19335  Shadbolt, W.
    10483  Shanley, F.
    18532  Sharman, H.
    21163  Sharp, A. H.
     8582  Sharp, H. E.
    17993  Sharp, P. C.
    11582  Sharples, E.
    15753  Sharrett, G.
    18482  Shattock, D. L.
    15970  Shaw, E.
    21838  Shaw, J.
    18740  Shaw, W.
    25197  Shaw, W.
    20877  Shaw, W. A.
    26740  Sheavyn, W. F.
    18291  Sheldon, B.
    26726  Shellard, E. W.
    17964  Shelley, A.
    26238  Shelley, T.
    25864  Shenton, C. G.
    11626  Shepley, J.
    11311  Sheppard, C. E.
    17879  Sheppard, G. E.
    11458  Sheppard, G. T.
    28871  Sheppard, P.
    19891  Sheppard, S. C.
    21458  Sherburn, A.
    13998  Sheridan, W.
    18509  Sherlock, G.
    20695  Sherratt, J.
    21839  Sherwood, T. W.
    27656  Shiner, W. A.
    14345  Shipp, A.
    8402   Shipp, H.
    29287  Shipp, L. C.
    10950  Shipp, W.
    21961  Shirley, J. H.
    17678  Short, F. V.
    21304  Short, H.
    15313  Shrimpton, L. D.
    29647  Sibley, F. G.
    27313  Siddle, A. E.
    19787  Sidwell, G. E.
    16387  Siewertsen, W. T.
    27948  Sillence, M. A.
    23916  Silva, P. H.
    28227  Silvester, E.
    19267  Simm, J.
    27058  Simmonds, A.
    16675  Simmons, F. A.
    16865  Simons, W. C.
    26099  Simpson, A. T.
    23009  Simpson, H. W.
    14941  Simpson, J.
    14183  Simpson, R. G.
     9302  Sims, E.
    10503  Singer, H. R.
    24859  Sisley, E.
    25458  Sivills, C.
    22106  Siviour, G. T.
    22517  Skarratt, G. F.
    25229  Skevington, M. H.
    20765  Skidmore, L. G.
    24028  Skidmore, W.
    20578  Skiller, C. E.
    22758  Skinley, S. F. J.
    23694  Skinner, H.
    25187  Slack, F. C.
    22436  Slack, H. F.
    17266  Slade, G. H. T.
    17418  Slade, L.
     7790  Slade, W.
    28809  Slater, H.
    23092  Slater, H.
    13466  Slater, O. E.
    25025  Slater, W. T.
    22388  Slee, L.
    26387  Smallwood, J.
    27984  Smart, F. G.
    25394  Smart, W.
    13634  Smiddy, W.
    14163  Smith, A.
    14549  Smith, A.
    18010  Smith, A.
    19063  Smith, A.
    24954  Smith, A.
    25045  Smith, A.
    18306  Smith, A. A.
    20788  Smith, A. W. J.
    15725  Smith, C.
    20743  Smith, C.
    18515  Smith, C. H.
    19304  Smith, C. W.
    23957  Smith, C. W.
    14587  Smith, E.
    27890  Smith, E. W.
    15739  Smith, F.
    23695  Smith, F.
    12165  Smith, F. C.
    22706  Smith, F. L.
    15117  Smith, F. V.
    12377  Smith, G.
    16189  Smith, G.
    29284  Smith, G. F.
    17417  Smith, G. H.
    27454  Smith, G. W.
    14950  Smith, H.
    20793  Smith, H.
    22541  Smith, H.
    27449  Smith, H.
    28419  Smith, H.
    14951  Smith, H. M.
    15915  Smith, J.
    20319  Smith, J. H.
    22859  Smith, J. T.
    23769  Smith, J. W.
    23596  Smith, L. J.
    13473  Smith, P.
    16560  Smith, P. W.
    11650  Smith, R.
    16762  Smith, R. H.
    14156  Smith, S.
    22997  Smith, S.
    23560  Smith, S.
    25489  Smith, S.
    12331  Smith, S. J.
    26906  Smith, S. J.
    18423  Smith, T.
    23654  Smith, T.
    30636  Smith, T.
    17399  Smith, W.
    17185  Smith, W. A.
    17740  Smith, W. A.
    29307  Smith, W. E.
    16639  Smith, W. G.
    30000  Smith, W. H.
    21024  Smith, W. J.
    19402  Smyth, A. P.
    13779  Snell, H. W.
    21920  Snelson, J. T. H.
    16187  Soton, W.
    28689  Soulsby, J.
    13767  Southan, P.
    29544  Southern, F.
    28259  Southwell, A.
    26635  Spackman, J.
    30479  Spalding, A. H., M.M.
    27572  Spargo, C. M.
    19752  Sparkes, S. B.
    16175  Sparrow, B.
    20306  Speakman, T.
    15538  Speller, H.
    28392  Spence, A.
    17791  Spencer, J. A.
    22927  Spencer, J. H.
    29414  Sporton, E. E.
    27331  Spraggon, G.
    13505  Springhall, W.
    11338  Springthorpe, A.
    17153  Squance, E.
    19157  Squier, C. E.
    22664  Squires, B.
    19212  Stack, P. F.
    25403  Stafford, C. F.
    28770  Stafford, E. W.
    30203  Stafford, W. J.
    29428  Stairs, A.
    18920  Stairs, S.
    18741  Staniford, J.
    24799  Stanley, H. H.
    30191  Stannard, H.
    28789  Stanton, G.
    23421  Stapel, E. J.
    20779  Staples, E.
    29348  Staples, W.
    26041  Starkie, G. W.
    19213  Staunton, W.
    19827  Stedman, F.
    12024  Steers, A. E.
    17239  Stenner, J. F.
    17252  Stenning, A., M.M.
    23467  Stephenson, R. E.
    13437  Stevens, A.
    25234  Stevens, B.
    19004  Stevens, D.
    14922  Stevens, G.
    17340  Stevens, G.
    24558  Stevens, J.
    12323  Stevenson, C.
    29111  Stevenson, J.
    22572  Stevenson, R.
    20008  Stevenson, W.
    20866  Stewart, A.
    26081  Stewart, S. A.
    28416  Stiles, V. G.
    20455  Stockell, E. R.
    14059  Stokes, B.
    16367  Stone, W. C.
    16267  Stone, W. H.
    27138  Storey, F. J.
    18537  Storey, W.
    18272  Stott, J.
    24606  Stott, M. M.
    28600  Stowell, S. S.
    14117  Strange, H.
    24096  Strange, L. G.
    20605  Stratford, F. G.
    26909  Stratford, P. R.
    20629  Stratton, E. A.
    25826  Stratton, H.
    13472  Street, P.
    17730  Streeter, J. J.
    22990  Streeter, C. W.
    25202  Stretton, T. H.
    29473  Strong, A.
    29534  Strugnell, C. F.
    18161  Stuart, J.
    16816  Stubbs, H. P.
    18613  Stubbs, L.
     9463  Stubbs, W. A.
    22238  Studholme, G.
    27691  Sturdy, H.
    27938  Sturgeon, A.
    25852  Sturgess, J. W.
    17793  Styles, C.
    18229  Styles, S.
    19685  Styles, W. L.
    27160  Sugden, A.
    12933  Sullivan, F.
    17273  Sullivan, H. C.
    12174  Summerlin, W. J. B.
    29823  Summer, J.
    23031  Summers, A.
    29007  Summers, A. R.
    21500  Summers, L. J.
    31173  Sumnall, B.
    16166  Sumner, H. H.
    25168  Surch, P.
    23373  Surgay, R.
    20119  Surtees, R. R.
    26386  Sutcliffe, J.
    26648  Suter, E. G.
    20862  Sutton, F.
    18510  Swain, C.
    18970  Swain, T. J.
    21985  Swain, W.
    21127  Sweet, P.
    15279  Swinard, W. E.
    24170  Swinbourne, I.
    24513  Swinbourne, S. J.
    30379  Swinfen, H.
    15572  Swinscoe, A.
    11617  Symonds, G. H.
    23273  Symonds, F. C.
    20169  Talbot, F.
    10944  Talbot, J.
    25104  Tall, W. H.
    26005  Tallon, T.
    19702  Talner, A.
    21738  Tandy, F.
    20409  Tanner, F.
    20452  Tansley, F.
    25473  Tarbard, V.
    18903  Targitt, W. G.
    23100  Tasker. J. T.
    25128  Tattersall, W.
    10935  Taylor, A.
    13392  Taylor, A.
    16155  Taylor, A.
    24489  Taylor, A.
    26464  Taylor, A.
    19170  Taylor, E.
    15416  Taylor, E. A.
    26266  Taylor, E. A.
    25786  Taylor, E. W.
    26991  Taylor, F.
    22655  Taylor, G.
    14964  Taylor, H.
    23111  Taylor, J.
    26115  Taylor, J.
    26875  Taylor, J.
    28321  Taylor, J. D.
    25300  Taylor, P. D.
    14660  Taylor, S.
    16419  Taylor, S. J.
    15578  Taylor, T.
    21732  Taylor, T. E.
    28482  Taylor, V. A.
    15287  Taylor, W.
    26712  Taylor, W.
    26832  Taylor, W.
    27488  Tebbutt, J. C.
    27866  Tector, P. O.
    19536  Temple, E. C.
    11337  Tetlow, W. H.
    18557  Tew, C. W.
    24058  Thacker, A. E.
    17926  Thain, M. E.
    29138  Thayre, P. F.
    19993  Theaker, J. W.
    23178  Thelwell, E. J.
    24645  Theyer, C.
    19171  Thomas, A. C.
    27943  Thomas, G.
    28943  Thomas, H.
    30022  Thomas, H. G.
    20844  Thomas, J.
    19298  Thomas, T.
    23775  Thomas, W.
    10932  Thomas, W. E.
    12601  Thompson, A.
    29410  Thompson, F.
    24085  Thompson, F. C.
    21778  Thompson, G.
    25064  Thompson, J.
    22675  Thompson, J. A.
    19413  Thompson, R.
    26373  Thompson, R.
    17837  Thompson, T.
    28276  Thompson, T.
    15847  Thompson, W.
    32008  Thompson, W.
    24953  Thompson, W. J.
    24038  Thompson, W. R.
    21864  Thorne, E.
    28313  Thorne, J.
    24781  Thorneycroft, A.
    18615  Thornton, G. F., M.M.
    27573  Thorogood, L. J.
    24395  Thorp, W. A. G.
    15712  Thorpe, E.
    27402  Thorpe, H. G.
    30110  Thorpe, W.
    14270  Thorpe, W. H.
    22978  Thorley, J.
    28089  Threadgale, S. H.
    22742  Tibbitts, F.
    20580  Tibble, F.
    16629  Tickell, R. E.
    18311  Tickner, J.
    22275  Tideswell, P.
    28250  Tigwell, E.
    27899  Tildesley, E.
    18077  Till, H. P.
    21973  Tilley, W. E.
    14244  Timmins, A. E.
    20766  Timms, B. S.
    17741  Timms, H.
    29066  Timms, J. W.
    22598  Timperley, H.
    17502  Tincombe, E.
    22787  Tinsley, R.
    24496  Tipper, W. T.
    23084  Titley, E.
    31450  Tocknell, C.
    24573  Todd, A.
    22484  Todd, B. H.
    31333  Todd, S. G.
    15827  Tolley, J. W.
    15467  Tomkins, H. J.
    29987  Tomlinson, A.
    22051  Tomlinson, H.
    19905  Tomlinson, J.
    19521  Tomlinson, J. W.
    28218  Tomlinson, W.
    16490  Tomlinson, W.
    27215  Toney, H.
    22521  Tonks, H.
    18558  Toon, J. N.
    25080  Toon, J. T.
    26409  Toplis, L. J.
    26048  Tovey, J. W.
    25625  Towler, H. J.
    21102  Townsend, T.
    28971  Townsend, W. H.
    14289  Tracy, H.
    23899  Trafford, G.
    23886  Tranter, C.
    17027  Tranter, H. F.
    24257  Treadwell, W.
    10980  Tredall, W.
    24237  Trickett, R. A.
    15620  Trigg, G. A.
    27017  Trim, E. J.
    16310  Trivitt, A. G.
    19888  Trood, E. J.
    13604  Trotman, F.
    14664  Trott, B.
    23508  Trotter, J.
    21687  Trow, C.
    16124  Trull, C. H.
    18901  Trundle, B.
    24531  Truss, W. G.
    19158  Trydell, C.
    22634  Tucker, G.
    24438  Tucker, T.
    21762  Tudbury, J.
    26401  Tudor, G. H.
    26455  Tullett, A. E.
    17982  Tullett, W. G.
    25092  Tunnicliffe, A.
    21076  Tunstall, F.
    20191  Turley, T.
    30409  Turner, C. D.
    15960  Turner, G.
    16738  Turner, G.
    27088  Turner, G.
    31590  Turner, G. H.
    29469  Turner, H.
    29374  Turner, J. G.
    10914  Turner, J. H.
    19055  Turner, S.
    19933  Turner, T.
    22108  Turner, T. W.
    16220  Turner, W.
    23547  Turner, W. F.
    17742  Turney, A. P.
    13253  Turton, A.
    11728  Turton, J. S.
    30339  Turver, E.
    18964  Turvey, A. W.
    17120  Tutton, H.
    30620  Tweddle, R.
    30471  Tyas, S.
    17065  Tyler, A. G.
    18837  Tyler, A. H.
    26624  Tyson, W. P.
    23169  Underwood, D.
    10535  Underwood, G.
    20977  Upstone, G.
    28092  Upton, F.
    22397  Upton, J. H.
    14589  Usherwood, B.
    21234  Uttley, R.
    19865  Vagg, C.
    16319  Varney, J.
    26889  Varty, G. H.
    28916  Vaughan, W. L.
    27942  Veale, R. W.
    21226  Venables, H.
    21227  Venables, W. J.
    23477  Vernon, H.
    18891  Vickers, F. P.
    29727  Vickers, J.
    11525  Vickery, W. N.
    17848  Viggers, E. G.
    17887  Vincent, A. J.
    27767  Vincent, E.
    18401  Vine, M. W.
    27942  Vines, E.
    24042  Viney, P. G.
     8064  Vintner, C.
    27904  Vintner, G.
    26702  Volckman, K. P.
    28256  Vollans, H.
    22999  Voss, H.
    16968  Wackett, E. E.
    20752  Wade, A. J.
    23887  Wager, A.
    17904  Wagstaff, E.
    23359  Wagstaff, G. A.
    13745  Wainwright, T.
    27317  Waite, C.
    31255  Waite, F.
    23032  Waite, H.
    15934  Waite, W.
    24861  Waite, W.
    21201  Wakefield, J.
    20139  Wakelin, C. H.
    13557  Walden, G.
    12889  Walduck, J.
    14450  Walker, A. L.
    19860  Walker, A. V.
    20384  Walker, C. J.
    12493  Walker, E.
    14734  Walker, F. G.
    21094  Walker, H.
    18892  Walker, J. W.
    24568  Walker, N. T.
    16713  Walker, R.
    14515  Walker, T.
    15715  Walker, T.
    16573  Walker, T.
    28957  Walker, T. W.
    12689  Walker, W.
    14568  Walker, W.
    30624  Walkley, S. O.
    18931  Wall, G. H.
    25768  Wall, H.
    15559  Wall, T.
    23642  Wallbank, T.
    12566  Wallington, A.
    10757  Wallis, T. C.
    24704  Wallis, W. A.
    26588  Walpole, W.
    12445  Walsh, M.
    16475  Waltham, W.
    27344  Walton, G.
    26644  Walton, H. S.
    17764  Walton, J.
    27644  Walton, J. S.
    18560  Walton, W. F.
    11493  Walton, W.
    14723  Ward, A. P.
    12486  Ward, C. H.
    23651  Ward, G.
    22549  Ward, H.
    27792  Ward, H.
    29405  Ward, J. B.
    21850  Ward, J. W.
    11972  Ward, R.
    15889  Ward, W.
    28780  Wardale, G. S.
    14994  Wardlaw, W. R. S.
    26788  Wardle, E. M.
    17421  Wardle, J.
    12220  Warhurst, J.
    12955  Warland, A.
    14198  Warlock, G.
    11839  Warner, J. W., D.C.M.
    16827  Warner, L.
    10841  Warnes, J.
    15023  Warren, E.
    11606  Warren, J.
    20117  Warren, M. A.
    25635  Warren, W.
    11520  Warrener, G.
    16749  Warrinton, R.
    28057  Warton, J. B.
    23710  Warwick, A.
    14552  Washington, H. J.
    22784  Wastell, T. W.
    18177  Waterman, W. J.
    18585  Wathen, W.
    26641  Watkin, F.
    16219  Watkins, J.
    23085  Watkinson, G. E.
    23761  Watson, F. J.
    28209  Watson, H.
    16391  Watson, M.
     9652  Watson, R.
    24302  Watson, T.
    10929  Watson, W.
    24612  Watts, G.
    21483  Watts, W. W.
    21090  Weaving, A. G.
    14888  Webb, A. J.
    18618  Webb, H.
    16813  Webb, H. T.
     8827  Webb, T. C.
    13771  Webster, A.
    29141  Webster, A. S.
    22522  Webster, F.
    13689  Webster, G. J.
    18326  Webster, H.
    15524  Webster, W.
    27474  Wedd, P.
    14903  Weedon, H.
    19541  Weekes, W. R.
    21219  Welch, A. O.
    17724  Welch, J. G.
    26155  Welford, J. J.
    17023  Weller, J. H.
    24159  Wells, A.
    25970  Wells, A. W.
    22384  Wells, J. S.
    24631  Wells, J. W.
    17352  Wells, T. G.
    27545  Wells, W. F.
    23246  Welsted, E. G.
    28590  Wensley, W.
    10700  Wesley, J.
    16592  West, A. E.
    29867  West, G. W.
    21295  West, S.
    20974  West, S. R.
    21922  Westhead, E.
    21306  Westhead, J.
    28272  Westhead, J.
    16085  Westlake, B. C.
    19580  Weston, T. J.
    15552  Westwood, D.
    11387  Wetherall, W.
    22219  Whadcoat, C.
    23968  Whall, A.
    15056  Whalley, W.
    22863  Wheal, E.
    11276  Wheatcroft, W. H.
    12766  Wheeler, F. G.
    22462  Wheeler, G. C.
    20712  Wheeler, H. J.
    17167  Wheeler, J.
    19607  Wheeler, J. C.
    24185  Wheeler, R.
    21467  Wheeler, W. G.
    17671  Wheelock, G. W.
    21912  Whild, T.
    28643  Whiley, G.
    26595  Whipp, T.
    27327  Whitaker, B. M.
    17264  Whitaker, J.
    17214  Whitaker, S.
    26880  Whitaker, T.
    29077  Whitaker, T. E.
    29666  Whitbread, W.
    29319  Whitcombe, A.
    27597  Whitcombe, W. J.
    16409  Whitcroft, C. O.
    24972  White, A. J.
    28136  White, A. J.
    16352  White, B. C.
    26240  White, D. G.
    19908  White, G. E.
    14480  White, E.
    13231  White, H. G.
    16406  White, J.
    26700  White, J. H.
    20440  White, P.
    26861  White, W. H. E.
    15186  White, W.
    16259  Whitehall, A.
    15298  Whitehead, A. H.
    26023  Whitehead, J. A.
    12178  Whitmore, J.
    27553  Whitelock, J. E.
    28053  Whitlock, S. F. H.
    26282  Whitnell, J. W.
    10078  Whitney, R.
    25401  Whittaker, F.
    24140  Whittall, R. J.
    16278  Whitton, A.
    12971  Whitty, J.
    27324  Whybray, N. E.
    24083  Whyley, B.
    31736  Wickens, T.
    24019  Wickstead, H. W.
    28868  Widdowson, H.
    26530  Widdup, J. R.
    25078  Wiggett, L. V.
    22883  Wiggins, H.
    18990  Wigglesworth, E.
    25309  Wilcox, W.
    20513  Wild, G.
    27109  Wild, J.
    20797  Wildgoose, W.
    30621  Wilkins, A. E.
    17131  Wilkins, R.
    29104  Wilkinson, G.
    22135  Wilkinson, J. T.
    27513  Wilkinson, P.
    22713  Wilkinson, R.
    28964  Wilkinson, T. E.
    14387  Wilkinson, V.
    16226  Williams, A.
    16176  Williams, A. T.
    26965  Williams, D.
    24958  Williams, F.
    25181  Williams, F.
    23153  Williams, H.
    16623  Williams, H.
    17425  Williams, I.
    27110  Williams, J.
    12716  Williams, J.
    29520  Williams, J.
    26917  Williams, J. W.
    28972  Williams, S.
    21814  Williams, T.
    15282  Williams, T. H.
    27037  Williams, T. H.
    24809  Williamson, A.
    17165  Williamson, H.
    20935  Williamson, T.
    27822  Willis, E. J.
    13942  Willis, H.
    25053  Willis, J. M.
    21182  Willis, W.
    22743  Willis, W.
    17765  Willman, R.
    12041  Willock, W.
    26920  Wills, A. H.
    15182  Wills, C.
    18853  Willson, E. R.
    28340  Wilshire, F. W.
    13069  Wilson, A. G.
    24284  Wilson, C.
    22046  Wilson, C. P.
    22386  Wilson, E. A.
    14435  Wilson, E.
    24324  Wilson, F.
    24840  Wilson, F.
    27751  Wilson, F.
    23275  Wilson, J.
    26862  Wilson, J.
    19828  Wilson, R.
    28246  Wilson, S. N.
    16558  Wimbush, G.
    23663  Windeatt, W. H.
    25897  Wing, H. E.
    25310  Winmill, E.
    20936  Winn, C.
    27417  Winn, W. C.
    19918  Winterford, A.
    26094  Wise, H.
    21198  Wise, T.
    16891  Witham, H.
    14435  Witson, E.
    29253  Witt, T. F.
    18369  Wood, C.
    20213  Wood, F.
    21710  Wood, J.
    27681  Wood, J. W.
    11866  Wood, R.
    21203  Wood, W. W.
    29788  Woodall, J. H.
    24914  Woodcock, G.
    25210  Woodcock, H. A.
    30946  Woodhams, O. C.
    24550  Woodhead, G.
    21354  Woodley, J. R.
    17595  Woodman, H. C.
    17924  Woodrow, R.
    28113  Woods, H. S.
    24381  Woodward, G.
    17158  Woodward, G. H.
    29283  Woodward, J.
    28455  Woodward, J. H.
    19371  Woodward, W.
    24332  Woodward, W.
    24255  Wooff, J.
    24726  Wooldridge, D. T.
    27457  Wooldridge, B.
    29614  Wooldridge, G. A.
    23834  Woollett, W.
    27032  Woolley, A.
    21450  Woolley, J.
    17216  Wootten, J. W
    28566  Wordley, R. C.
    17262  Workman, R.
    22954  Wragg, F.
    12828  Wright, A.
    24391  Wright, A. L.
    30010  Wright, C. A.
    28267  Wright, F. S.
    29734  Wright, G. C.
    16413  Wright, H.
    22531  Wright, J.
    23783  Wright, J.
    26768  Wright, J.
    17438  Wright, J. S.
    11261  Wright, R. S.
    20321  Wright, R. S.
    30473  Wright, T.
    19645  Wright, T.
    27821  Wright, W.
    21275  Wright, W. H.
    21363  Wyer, H.
    25499  Wyon, H. V. T.
    21623  Yapp, J.
    16240  Yarnell, R.
    21871  Yates, C.
     9385  Yates, F.
    21286  Yates, G. W.
     9625  Yates, J.
    21070  Yates, J. H.
    24538  Yeomans, L.
    17374  Yeomans, T.
    28337  Yeowart, J.
    20665  Young, A. G.
    28811  Young, C.
    28329  Young, C. W.
    26030  Young, F.
    25017  Young, F. J.
    23815  Young, W.
    12340  Young, W. H.
    22777  Youngs, C.
    25893  Zimmer, E. A.




                              APPENDIX V

                           OFFICERS WOUNDED


                             MAJOR-GENERAL

    Batt.                                                        Date.

         Ruggles-Brise, H. G., C.B., M.V.O                     2/11/14


                          BRIGADIER-GENERALS

         Ardee, R. le N. Lord, C.B.                     {      1/11/14
                                                        { 4/4/18 (gas)
         Cooper, R. J., C.B., C.V.O.                           10/8/15
         Pereira, G. E., C.B., C.M.G., D.S.O.                  8/10/15
         Trotter, G. F., C.B., C.M.G., C.B.E., M.V.O., D.S.O.  12/3/15


                               COLONELS

         Scott-Kerr, R., C.B., M.V.O., D.S.O.                   1/9/14
      1  Corkran, C. E., C.M.G. (Bt.-Col.) (Temp.
           Brig.-General)                                      16/6/15
      1  Earle, M., C.M.G., D.S.O. (repatriated prisoner
           of war)                                            29/10/14


                          LIEUTENANT-COLONEL

         Jeffreys, G. D., C.B., C.M.G. (Temp.
           Major-General)                                      14/4/16


                                MAJORS

      4  Hamilton, G. C., C.M.G., D.S.O. (Temp. Col.)          27/9/15
      1  Leatham, R. E. K., D.S.O. (Bt.-Lieut.-Col.)          24/10/14
      2  Maitland, M. E. M. C., D.S.O. (Temp. Lieut.-Col.)    23/10/14
      2  Pike, E. J. L., M.C. (Bt.-Lieut.-Col.)               11/11/14
      2  Powell, E. G. H.                                  11-13/11/14
         Scott, Lord F. G. M. D., D.S.O., Bt.-Lieut.-Col.
           (with Irish Guards)                                31/10/14
      3  Sergison-Brooke, B. N., C.M.G., D.S.O.
           (Bt.-Lieut.-Col.)                                14-17/9/16
         Seymour, Lord H. C., D.S.O. (Bt.-Lieut.-Col.)       { 25/8/14
           (in West Africa)                                  { 30/8/18
      s. Vivian, V., C.M.G., D.S.O., M.V.O.
           (Bt.-Lieut.-Col.)                                   18/3/15


                               CAPTAINS

      1  Ames, L. G.                                          29/10/14
      1  Aubrey-Fletcher, H. L., D.S.O., M.V.O.             { 23/10/14
           (Temp. Lieut.-Col.)                              {  27/9/15
      1  Bailey, Hon. W. R., D.S.O.                            24/8/18
      4  Britten, C. R., M.C.                               {  25/9/16
                                                            { 28/11/17
      2  Craigie, J. C., M.C.                               {  18/5/15
                                                            {  22/9/15
                                                            {  3/10/15
                                                            { 11/10/15
    2/3  Dowling, C. M. C.                               { 11-13/11/14
                                                         {     27/9/15
                                                         {    17/10/15
      1  Duckworth-King, Sir G. H. J., Bart.                   3/11/14
      3  Dufferin and Ava, Marquis of, D.S.O.                 17/10/15
      1   Fisher-Rowe, C. V., M.C. (Bt.-Major)               { 13/3/15
                                                             { 4/10/18
    4/1  Gort, J. S. S. P. V., Viscount, V.C.,               { 1/12/17
           D.S.O., M.V.O., M.C. (Bt.-Major)                  { 31/7/17
           (Temp. Lieut.-Col.)                               { 27/9/18
      2  Graham, H. A. R.                                    {  7/2/15
                                                             {  6/5/15
      4  Greville, C. H., D.S.O. (Actg. Major)                 31/7/17
      2  Harcourt-Vernon, G. C. FitzH., D.S.O., M.C.         { 15/9/16
           (Actg. Major)                                     { 29/5/16
      3  Hughes, J. S., M.C. (Temp. Major)                { 14-16/9/14
                                                            { 27/11/17
      1  Kenyon-Slaney, R. O. R.                              29/10/14
      1  Kingsmill, A. de P., D.S.O., M.C.                     10/3/15
      1  Lambert, R. S., M.C.                                 29/10/14
      2  Lascelles, H. G. C., Viscount, D.S.O.               { 16/6/15
                                                             { 15/9/16
      4  Morrison, J. A., D.S.O.                             {  3/5/15
                                                             { 30/4/18
      1  Napier, Sir A. L. M., Bart.                         { 29/9/15
                                                             { 9/10/17
      2  Needham, Hon. F. E.                                    1/9/14
      2  Newton, C. N., M.C.                                  19/11/16
      1  Percy, Lord W. R., D.S.O. (Temp. Lieut.-Col.)         11/3/15
      1  Powell, J. H.                                        29/10/14
      1  Rhodes, A. T. G.                                     13/10/17
      2  Ridley, E. D., M.C. (Temp. Major)                     27/9/14
      2  Rose, I. St. C., O.B.E.                              31/10/14
         Rowley, C. S                                          27/9/15
      4  Simpson, J. H. C., M.C.                            {   2/9/18
                                                            { 11/10/18
      2  Smith, O. M.                                          27/8/18
    2/4  Spencer-Churchill, E. G., M.C.                     { 25/12/14
                                                            {  22/9/16
      1  Stanley, E. M. C., Lord                               10/5/16
      1  Trench, R. P. le P., M.C.                            17/10/15
      3  Vivian, G. N., O.B.E.                                 27/9/15
      1  Wakeman, O.                                          17/10/15
    2/3  Walker, C. F. A., M.C.                           { 14-16/9/14
                                                          {   26/10/15
      1  Ward, E. S.                                          15/11/14
      2  Wilson, G. B., M.C.                                   27/3/18
      3  Wolrige-Gordon, R.                                     3/3/16


                              LIEUTENANTS

      4  Abel-Smith, L. R.                                   { 15/9/16
                                                             { 1/12/17
      2  Acland, A. W., M.C.                                 { 1/12/17
                                                             { 22/5/18
      3  Adair, A. H. S., M.C.                                 4/11/18
         Adams, A. C.                                          27/7/17
      3  Agar-Robartes, Hon. A. G., M.C. (Actg. Capt.)         8/10/15
      2  Agar-Robartes, Hon. A. V., M.C. (Actg. Capt.)       { 8/10/15
                                                             { 14/9/16
                                                             { 23/3/18
         Alexander, N. G. A.                                  25/11/17
      3  Anson, F., M.C. (Temp. Capt.)                       { 28/9/15
                                                             { 31/7/15
      3  Bennett, N. C.                                        27/3/18
      4  Benson, C. E., D.S.O. (Actg. Capt.)                   25/3/18
      1  Bevan, T. P. M., M.C.                                 3/12/17
      1  Bliss, A. E. D.                                      21/10/18
      4  Bonham-Carter, F. G. (Actg. Capt.)                    16/6/16
      3  Borthwick, Hon. A. M.                                 12/9/17
      3  Boughey, C. L. F.                                     27/4/18
      1  Bradley, H. G. W. (Actg. Capt.)                        9/5/16
         Burman, B.                                             5/3/17
         Burt, G. C.                                           13/4/18
      1  Brown, A. M., M.C.                                    27/9/18
      3  Campbell, K. A.                                       4/11/18
      3  Carrington, C. W., D.S.O. (Actg. Capt.)               27/3/18
      3  Carstairs, C. C., M.C.                                4/11/18
      2  Carter, H. G.                                         29/3/16
      2  Cary, Hon. P. P. (Actg. Capt.)                      { 18/5/15
                                                             { 23/8/18
      3  Cassy, D. W.                                       14-17/9/16
      1  Chambers, A. S., M.C. (Actg. Capt.)                   24/8/18
      3  Champneys, W. (Actg. Capt.)                        14-17/9/16
      2  Combe, T. A.                                          27/9/18
      1  Corbett, Hon. T. G. P., M.C.                          30/3/18
      2  Cornforth, J. C., M.C. (Actg. Capt.)                  1/12/17
      3  Cornish, G. M., M.C.                               14-17/9/16
         Craig, D., D.S.O.                                    10/10/17
      2  Crookshank, H. F. C. (Temp. Capt.)                 { 23/10/15
                                                            {  15/9/16
      2  Crosland, C.                                          27/9/15
      1  Cruttenden, C.                                        1/12/17
      2  Cubitt, C. C. (Temp. Capt.)                           15/9/16
      3  Dalmeny, A. E. H. M. A., Lord, D.S.O., M.C.
           (Temp. Lieut.-Col.)                                 24/7/15
      3  De Geijer, E. N., M.C.                                11/8/18
      3  De Lisle, A. P. J. M. P.                            { 28/3/18
                                                             { 27/8/18
      3  Delacombe, R., M.C.                                   23/8/18
         Denny, J. A.                                          25/1/15
      2  Dent, W. H. S.                                        1/12/17
      1  Dickinson, T. M. (attached from 16th Cavalry I.A.)    16/5/15
      2  Drummond, F. H. J., M.C. (Actg. Capt.)              { 31/7/17
                                                             { 1/12/17
      1  Dunville, R. L.                                        6/5/16
      3  Dury, G. A. I., M.C. (Actg. Capt.)                     7/9/18
      3  Eaton, Hon. H. E.                                     21/6/16
      3  Eliot-Cornell, R. W.                                  19/9/17
      3  Elliott, A. G. (Actg. Capt.)                          31/7/17
      3  Ellison, C. E. M., M.C.                               8/12/15
      3  Ellison, P. J. M.                                     28/3/18
      2  Eyre, J. B. (Temp. Capt.)                            24/12/14
      3  Fitzgerald, E. G. A., D.S.O. (Actg. Capt.)          { 9/10/17
                                                             {  7/4/18
      1  Flower, N. A. C.                                      25/9/16
      1  Frere, J. H.                                          11/5/18
      3  Fryer, E. R. M., M.C. (Actg. Capt.)                   29/9/16
      1  Gardner, S. Y. P., M.C.                                5/9/17
      2  Giles, C. C. T.                                       27/8/18
      3  Godman, G. W.                                         4/11/18
      2  Gordon, C. A., M.C. (Actg. Capt.)                     4/11/18
      1  Gordon-Lennox, V. C. H.                              20/11/16
      2  Goschen, G. G.                                       24/12/14
      1  Graham, J. W.                                          6/5/16
      4  Green, G. R., M.C.                                    12/4/18
      4  Greenwood, J. E.                                      12/4/18
      1  Guthrie, C. T. R. S. (Temp. Capt.)                    11/3/15
      3  Hall, C. A., M.C.                                        8/17
      3  Hanham, Sir J. L., Bart.                             27/11/17
      2  Hanning, G. H.                                        12/3/18
      4  Hardinge, Hon. A. H. L., M.C. (Actg. Capt.)           1/12/17
      1  Hawkesworth, E. G., M.C.                              25/8/18
      1  Healey, C. H. C.                                    { 25/9/16
                                                             { 19/5/18
      3  Henderson, K.                                         31/7/17
      3  Hermon-Hodge, L. St. L.                             { 10/3/16
                                                             {  6/7/17
         Hewitt, C. J.                                         31/7/17
      3  Hirst, G. F. R., M.C. (Actg. Capt.)                  17/10/15
      4  Hoare, E. R. D.                                       27/9/15
      3  Hoare, G. H. R.                                      27/11/17
      3  Holbech, L. (Actg. Capt.), D.S.O., M.C.                1/4/18
      3  Hollins, C. B.                                       27/11/17
      3  Hopley, F. J. V. B., D.S.O.                        14-17/9/16
      4  Irby, C. E., M.C.                                    11/10/17
      2  Irvine, A. F.                                         25/9/16
      2  Jacob, J. H.                                        { 31/7/17
                                                             { 28/3/18
      2  Jesper, N. McK., M.C.                               { 15/9/16
                                                             { 27/8/18
      1  Jones, B. H.                                          27/9/18
      4  Kendall, R. Y. T.                                   { 12/9/16
                                                             { 1/12/17
      3  Knollys, A. C., M.C.                                  27/3/18
      2  Lawford, R. D., M.C.                                  31/7/17
      1  Lawrence, B. L.                                       30/7/17
      2  Layland-Barratt, F. H. G., M.C.                       1/12/17
      4  Layton, B. C. (Actg. Capt.)                         { 27/7/16
                                                             {  6/1/18
      1  Llewelyn, H.                                       10-12/9/16
      3  Long, E. C.                                          27/11/17
      1  Lovell, W. H., M.C. (Actg. Capt.)                     27/9/18
      3  Lycett-Greene, F. D.                                  28/9/15
      4  Macmillan, M. H.                                    { 27/9/15
                                                             { 18/7/16
                                                             { 15/9/16
         Magnay, F. A.                                         1/12/17
      4  Maine, H. C. S.                                       24/9/16
      2  Manners, Hon. F. H., M.C.                             30/3/18
      2  Mildmay, A. S. L. St. J., M.C. (Temp. Capt.)          11/3/15
      2  Minchin, T. W., D.S.O. (Temp. Capt.)                { 15/9/16
                                                             { 13/4/18
      1  Morley, Hon. C. H.                                 15-18/5/15
      4  Nash, C. S., M.C.                                  { 26/11/17
                                                            {  12/4/18
      2  Neill, E. M., M.C.                                   21/10/18
      3  Neville, W. W. S. C., M.C. (Temp. Major)              31/7/17
      3  Ogle, H. R.                                           20/7/17
      4  Oliver, F. R.                                        28/11/17
      1  Osborne, R. B.                                       11/10/18
      1  Paget-Cooke, O. D. P.                                 24/4/18
      2  Parker-Jervis, T.                                     15/9/16
      2  Paton, J. A.                                          27/8/18
      2  Pelly, P. V.                                          27/9/18
      2  Penn, A. H., M.C. (Temp. Capt.)                       17/5/15
      2  Ponsonby, Hon. B. B.                                   6/5/15
      2  Ponsonby, G. A.                                      12/12/16
      2  Ponsonby, M. H.                                       29/1/18
      4  Ridley, M. A. T.                                      27/9/15
      3  Ritchie, A. T. A., M.C. (Actg. Capt.)               { 27/9/15
                                                             { 15/9/16
                                                             { 31/7/17
         Rodney, Hon. C. C. S.                                 13/4/18
      2  Rumbold, H. C. L.                                      2/1/15
      1  St. Aubyn, F. C.                                    { 16/5/15
                                                             {25/10/15
      1  Samuelson, B. G. (Actg. Capt.)                     14-16/9/16
      4  Selby-Lowndes, J. W. F., M.C.                        22/12/16
      3  Seymour, E. W.                                        23/3/18
      1  Sharp, C. C. T.                                    10-12/9/16
      2  Sharpe, R. T.                                         27/9/18
      1  Shelley, E. B. (Actg. Capt.)                       10-12/9/16
      4  Shelley, G. E. (Actg. Capt.)                          27/9/15
      2  Smith, D. A., M.C. (Actg. Capt.)                    {  5/8/15
                                                             { 29/3/16
         Smith, D. E.                                         11/10/17
      1  Stein, O. F., D.S.O. (Actg. Capt.)               { 10-12/9/16
                                                          {    19/5/18
         Stephenson, P. K. (Actg. Capt.)                      24/11/17
      2  Stirling, E. G.                                        6/7/16
      1  Stourton, R. H. P. J.                              10-12/9/16
         Sutton, K. H. M.                                      31/7/17
         Swaine, Y. W.                                         23/7/17
      1  Swift, C. T. (Actg. Capt.)                            25/9/16
      2  Tabor, J.                                             9/10/17
      3  Tate, E. D.                                         { 14/9/17
                                                             { 27/3/18
      2  Terrell, R. (Actg. Capt.)                             21/2/17
         Thomas, M. D.                                         13/4/18
      3  Thornhill, N., M.C.                                   9/10/17
      1  Timmis, W. U.                                         28/3/18
      1  Tindal-Atkinson, J. F.                                24/4/18
    2/3  Towneley-Bertie, Hon. M. H. E. C.                   { 13/9/16
                                                             { 10/5/18
      4  Veitch, J. J. M.                                      1/12/17
      1  Vernon, H. B., M.C.                                 {  6/3/17
                                                             { 24/8/18
      1  Villiers, G. J. T. H.                                 29/9/15
      3  Walker, P. M., M.C. (Actg. Capt.)                    25/10/15
      1  Webber, R. L.                                         24/8/18
      4  West, R. G., M.C.                                      5/9/17
      1  Westmacott, G. R., D.S.O.                             13/3/15
      3  Whitehead, A. O.                                   14-17/9/16
      2  Wiggins, H. G., M.C. (Actg. Capt.)                    25/9/16
      1  Wilkinson, C.                                          7/4/16
      3  Williams, H. St. J.                                14-17/9/16
      2  Wilton, J. D. C.                                     17/11/16
      2  Wright, R. B. B.                                      25/9/16
      4  Wrixon, M. P. B., M.C.                                27/2/18


                          SECOND LIEUTENANTS

      2  Battye, P. L. M.                                       8/2/15
      2  Bevan, R. C. M.                                       27/9/18
      1  Blunt, J. C.                                          27/9/18
      1  Brutton, C. P.                                        19/5/18
      3  Calvocoressi, S.                                       7/9/18
      1  Campbell, J. L.                                       30/7/18
      2  Chapman, H. M.                                        12/3/18
      1  Clarke, D. H., M.C.                                  11/10/18
      3  Clough-Taylor, E. L. F.                               22/8/18
      1  Conant, R. J. E.                                      23/8/18
      3  Cooper, H. St. C.                                    27/11/17
         Cox, P. H.                                            13/4/18
      2  Fitch, C. A.                                          29/4/18
      4  Gilbey, A. J.                                         23/3/18
      3  Gordon, H. P.                                          3/9/18
      1  Hall, C. B., M.C.                                    21/10/18
      3  Henderson, R. K.                                       7/9/18
      1  Holmes, R. E. I.                                      19/5/18
      4  Horne, D. E. A.                                       1/12/17
         Imeretinsky, Prince G.                                29/7/17
      3  Inglis-Jones, J. A.                                   26/5/18
      1  Jesper, L. C.                                         27/9/18
      3  Manley, W. B. L.                                       7/9/18
      2  Morgan, H. B. G.                                       6/9/17
      1  Nicholson, J. R.                                      28/3/18
      1  Payne, A. F.                                          12/9/18
         Philipps, G. P.                                       13/4/18
      4  Sich, H. W.                                           13/4/18
      1  Smith, O. W. D.                                       23/5/18
         Stewart, H. W.                                     { 11/10/17
                                                            {  27/3/18


                             QUARTERMASTER

      1  Teece, J., M.C. (Major and Q.M.)                     19/12/14


                                MISSING

      3  Bowes-Lyon, G. P.                                    27/11/17
      2  Gunnis, I. FitzG. S.                                   3/7/17


                 CASUALTIES SINCE COMMENCEMENT OF WAR

    +-----------+---------+--------+--------+-------+
    |Detail.    |Killed or|Wounded.|Missing.| Total.|
    |           |D. of W. |        |        |       |
    +-----------+---------+--------+--------+-------+
    |Officers   |    203  |    242 |     2  |   447 |
    |Other ranks|   4508  |   6939 |    21  |11,468 |
    +-----------+---------+--------+--------+-------+
    |  Totals   |   4711  |   7181 |    23  |11,915 |
    +-----------+---------+--------+--------+-------+

    Total number of Prisoners of War repatriated, 484.




                              APPENDIX VI

                                REWARDS


                               OFFICERS

        [_The ranks shown are those held at the time of award_]


                                "V.C."

    Gort, Viscount, Bt.-Major (Actg. Lieut.-Col.), D.S.O., M.V.O., M.C.
    Paton, G. H. T., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.), M.C. (Killed in action.)
    Pryce, T. T., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.), M.C. (Missing.)


                               "G.C.B."

    Mackinnon, Sir W. H., General, K.C.B., K.C.V.O.


                               "K.C.B."

    Cavan, Temp.-Gen. The Earl of, K.P., C.B., M.V.O.
    Davies, Sir F. J., Lieut.-Gen., K.C.M.G.
    Fergusson, Sir C., Bart., Lieut.-Gen., K.C.M.G., M.V.O., D.S.O.


                                "C.B."

    Ardee, Lord R. le N., Colonel (Temp. Brig.-Gen.)
    Cavan, The Earl of, Temp.-Gen., M.V.O.
    Clive, G. S., Bt.-Col., D.S.O.
    Cooper, R. J., Brig.-Gen., C.V.O.
    Corkran, C. E., Bt.-Col. (Temp. Brig.-Gen.)
    Crespigny, C. R. C. de, Lieut.-Col., D.S.O.
    Earle, M., Colonel, C.M.G., D.S.O.
    Gathorne-Hardy, Hon. J. F., Bt.-Col., D.S.O.
    Jeffreys, G. D., Bt.-Col. (Temp. Major-Gen.), C.M.G.
    Lloyd, A. H. O., Temp. Brig.-Gen., C.M.G., M.V.O.
    Loch, Lord E. D., Bt.-Col. (Temp. Brig.-Gen.), C.M.G., D.S.O.,
      M.V.O.
    Pereira, G. E., Bt.-Col. (Temp. Brig.-Gen.), C.M.G., D.S.O.
    Ruggles-Brise, H. G., Major-Gen., M.V.O.
    Trotter, G. F., Bt.-Lieut.-Col. (Temp. Brig.-Gen.), C.M.G., D.S.O.,
      M.V.O.


                              "G.C.M.G."

    Wales, Captain H.R.H. The Prince of (Temp. Major), K.G., G.B.E.,
      M.C.
    Cavan, Earl of, Lieut.-Gen., K.P., K.C.B.


                              "K.C.M.G."

    Cheylesmore, Lord, Maj.-Gen., K.C.V.O.
    Davies, Sir F. J., Lieut.-Gen., K.C.B.
    Fergusson, Sir C., Lieut.-Gen., K.C.B., D.S.O., M.V.O.
    Ruggles-Brise, H. G., Maj.-Gen., C.B., M.V.O.


                               "C.M.G."

    Cameron of Lochiel, D. W., Lieut.-Col.
    Clive, G. S., Temp. Maj.-Gen., C.B., D.S.O.
    Colston, Hon. E. M., Temp. Brig.-Gen., D.S.O., M.V.O.
    Corkran, C. E., Bt.-Col. (Temp. Brig.-Gen.).
    Crespigny, C. R. C. de, Lieut.-Col., D.S.O.
    Earle, M., Lieut.-Col., D.S.O.
    V.C. Freyberg, B. C., Capt. (Bt.-Lieut.-Col.), D.S.O.
    Gascoigne, E. F. O., Hon. Brig.-Gen., D.S.O.
    Gathorne-Hardy, Hon. J. F., Bt.-Col. (Temp. Brig.-Gen.), C.B.,
      D.S.O.
    Grigg, E. W. M., Temp. Lieut.-Col., D.S.O., M.C.
    Hamilton, G. C., Major (Temp. Col.), D.S.O.
    Harrison, C. E., Colonel, C.V.O., M.B., F.R.C.S.
    Jeffreys, G. D., Bt.-Col. (Temp. Major-Gen.).
    Lloyd, A. H. O., Lieut.-Col. (Temp. Brig.-Gen.), M.V.O.
      (Shropshire Yeomanry.)
    Loch, Lord E. D., Bt.-Col. (Temp. Brig.-Gen.), C.B., D.S.O., M.V.O.
    Pakenhem, H. A., Lieut.-Col. (R. Irish Rifles.)
    Russell, Hon. A. V. F., Major (Temp. Lieut.-Col.), M.V.O.
    Saltoun, A. W. F., Lord, Lieut.-Col.
    Scott-Kerr, R., Colonel, C.B., D.S.O., M.V.O.
    Sergison-Brooke, B. N., Bt.-Lt.-Col. (Temp. Brig.-Gen.), D.S.O.
    Smith, W. R. A., Lieut.-Col.
    Stanley, Hon. F. C., Bt.-Lt.-Col. (Temp. Brig.-Gen.), D.S.O.
    Streatfeild, Sir H., Colonel, K.C.V.O., C.B.
    Thorne, A. F. A. N., Major, D.S.O.
    Trotter, G. F., Bt.-Lieut.-Col. (Temp. Brig.-Gen.), C.B., D.S.O.,
      M.V.O.
    Vivian, V., Major (Bt.-Lieut.-Col.), D.S.O, M.V.O.


                               "D.S.O."

    Aubrey-Fletcher, H. L., Capt., M.V.O.
    Bailey, Hon. W. R., Capt. (Actg. Major).
    Benson, C. E., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Browning, F. A. M. (Actg. Capt.).
    Buchanan, J. N., Lieut. (Temp. Capt.), M.C.
    Campbell, K. A., Lieut.
    Carrington, C. W., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Clive, G. S., Bt.-Col., C.B.
    Cooper, A. D., Second Lieutenant.
    Colston, Hon. E. M., Temp. Brig.-Gen., C.M.G., M.V.O.
    Craig, D., Lieut.
    Crespigny, C. R. C. de, Temp. Brig.-Gen., C.M.G.
    Dalmeny, Lord, Temp. Lieut.-Col., M.C.
    Diggle, W. H., Capt. (Temp. Lieut.-Col.), M.C.
    Drury-Lowe, W. D., Capt. (Killed in action.)
    Eaton, Hon. F. O. H., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Ellice, E. C., Actg. Major.
    Fitzgerald, E. G. A., Lieut.
    Gathorne-Hardy, Hon. J. F., Bt.-Col., C.B.
    Gerard, C. R., Capt.
    V.C. Gort, Viscount, Bt.-Major (Actg. Lieut.-Col.), M.V.O., M.C.
    Gosselin, A. B. R. R., Capt. (Died of wounds.)
    Greville, C. H. (Actg. Major).
    Grey, R., Capt.
    Grigg, E. W. M., Temp. Lieut.-Col., M.C.
    Hamilton, Lord C. N., Capt., M.V.O.
    Hamilton, G. C., Temp. Col.
    Harcourt-Vernon, G. C. FitzH., Capt.
    Heneage, G. C. W., Major.
    Hermon-Hodge, R. H., Major.
    Hervey-Bathurst, Sir F. E. W., Bart., Major.
    Heywood-Lonsdale, H. H., Lieut.-Colonel. (Shropshire Yeomanry.)
    Holbech, L., Lieut., M.C.
    Hopley, F. J. V. B., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Kingsmill, A. de P., Capt. (Actg. Lieut.-Col.), M.C.
    Lamont, G. S., Second Lieutenant.
    Lascelles, Viscount, Capt. (Actg. Major).
    Leatham, R. E. K., Major (Actg. Lieut.-Col.).
    Lyttelton, O., Lieut. (Temp. Capt.), M.C.
    Maitland, M. E. M. C., Major.
    Minchin, T. W., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Mitchell, C., Capt. (Temp. Major).
    Morrison, J. A., Capt.
    Murray-Threipland, W., Lieut.-Col. (Temp. Col.).
    Nicol, W. E., Major.
    Percy, Lord W. R., Capt. (Temp. Major).
    Pilcher, W. S., Bt.-Major (Actg. Lieut.-Col.).
    Rasch, G. E. C., Capt. (Actg. Lieut.-Col.).
    Scott, Lord F. G. M. D., Bt.-Lieut.-Col.
    Sergison-Brooke, B. N., Bt.-Lieut.-Col. (Temp. Brig.-Gen.).
    Seymour, Lord H. C., Major (Bt.-Lieut.-Col.).
    Seymour, E., Capt., M.V.O.
    Sheppard, E., Capt., M.C.
    Stanhope, J. R., Earl, Major (Temp. Lieut.-Col.), M.C.
    Stein, O. F., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Streatfeild, H. S. J., Lieut.-Col. (London Regiment.)
    Thorne, A. F. A. N., Major (Actg. Lieut.-Col.).
    Vaughan, E. N. E. M., Major.
    Vivian, V., Major (Bt.-Lieut.-Col.), C.M.G., M.V.O.
    Warrender, H. V., Lieut.-Col.
    Westmacott, G. R., Temp. Capt.


                            BAR TO "D.S.O."

    Bailey, Hon. W. R., Capt. (Actg. Lieut.-Col.), D.S.O.
    V.C. Gort, Viscount, Capt., Bt.-Major (Actg. Lieut.-Col.), D.S.O.,
      M.V.O., M.C.
    Lascelles, Viscount, Capt. (Actg. Lieut.-Col.), D.S.O.
    Seymour, Lord H. C., Major, Bt.-Lieut.-Col., D.S.O.
    Thorne, A. F. A. N., Major (Actg. Lieut.-Col.), D.S.O.


                        SECOND BAR TO "D.S.O."

    V.C. Freyberg, B. C., Capt., Bt.-Lieut.-Col., D.S.O.
    V.C. Gort, Viscount, Capt., Bt.-Major (Actg. Lieut.-Col.), D.S.O.,
      M.V.O., M.C.
    Thorne, A. F. A. N., Major (Actg. Lieut.-Col.), D.S.O.


                                "M.C."

    Acland, A. W., Lieut.
    Acraman, W. E., Hon. Capt. and Quartermaster.
    Adair, A. H. S., Lieut.
    Agar-Robartes, Hon. A. V. (Actg. Major).
    Agar-Robartes, Hon. A. G., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Aird, J. R., Lieut.
    Alexander, N. G. A., Lieut.
    Anson, F., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Arnold-Forster, M. N., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.). (Guards M.G. Regiment.)
    Battye, P. L. M., Lieut. (Welsh Guards.)
    Beaumont-Nesbitt, F. G., Capt.
    Beaumont-Nesbitt, W. H., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.) (Killed in action.)
    Bevan, T. P. M., Lieut.
    Bicknell, R. A. W., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Briscoe, R. G., Lieut.
    Britten, C. R., Capt.
    Brown, A. M., Lieut.
    Bruce, R. C., Lieut. (3rd Gds. Bde., T.M.B.)
    Buchanan, J. N., Lieut. (Temp. Capt.).
    Bunbury, E. J., Lieut.
    Burke, J. B. M., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Byng, L. G., Lieut.
    Carstairs, C. C., Lieut.
    Cecil, Hon. W. A., Capt.
    Chambers, A. S., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Chapman, M., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.) (Killed in action.)
    Clarke, D. H., Lieut.
    Clarke, S. T. S., Lieut.
    Clive, H. A., Lieut.
    Corbett, Hon. T. G. P., Lieut.
    Cornforth, J. C., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Cornish, G. M., Lieut.
    Corry, A. V. L., Lieut.
    Craigie, J. C., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Cubitt, C. C., Lieut.
    Dalmeny, Lord, Temp. Lieut.-Col., D.S.O.
    De Geijer, E. N., Lieut.
    Delacombe, R., Lieut.
    Dent, W. H. S., Lieut.
    Diggle, W. H., Capt. (Temp. Lieut.-Col.).
    Drummond, F. H. J., Lieut.
    Duberly, E. H. J., Lieut. (Temp. Capt.).
    Dury, G. A. I., Lieut.
    Elliott, A. G., Lieut.
    Ellison, C. E. M., Lieut. (Temp. Capt.).
    Fairbairn, S. G., Lieut.
    Farquhar, R., Lieut. (Died of wounds.)
    Farquharson, M. G., 2nd Lieut.
    Filmer, Sir R. M., Bart., Capt. (Died of wounds.)
    Fisher-Rowe, C. V., Capt.
    Fisher-Rowe, L. G., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.). (Died of wounds.)
    Fraser, J. C., Lieut.
    Fryer, E. R. M., Lieut.
    Gardner, S. Y. P., Lieut.
    Gibbon, H. J., 2nd Lieut.
    Gordon, C. A., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Gort, Viscount, Bt.-Major (Actg. Lieut.-Col.), D.S.O., M.V.O.
    Green, G. R., Lieut.
    Grigg, E. W. M., Temp. Lieut.-Col., D.S.O.
    Gunnis, G. G., Actg. Capt. (Died of wounds.)
    Gunther, G. R., 2nd Lieut.
    Hague, C. N., Lieut.
    Hall, C. A., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Harbord, P. A. A., Lieut. (Died of wounds.)
    Harcourt-Vernon, G. C. FitzH., Capt. (Actg. Major), D.S.O.
    Harcourt-Vernon, E. G., 2nd Lieut.
    Hardinge, Hon. A. H. N., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Hawkesworth, E. G., Lieut.
    Heasman, F. J., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Herbert, C. G. Y., Lieut.
    Hermon-Hodge, L. St. L., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Hirst, G. F. R., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Holbech, L., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Hope, G. E., Capt. (Actg. Lieut.-Col.) (Presumed killed.)
    Hubbard, B. J., Lieut. (Killed in action.)
    Hughes, J. S., Capt.
    Irby, C. E., Lieut.
    Jesper, N. McK., Lieut.
    Keith, C. G., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Kingsmill, A. de P., Capt. (Actg. Lieut.-Col.), D.S.O.
    Knatchbull-Hugessen, M., Lieut. (Killed in action.)
    Knollys, A. C., Lieut.
    Lambert, R. S., Capt.
    Lawford, R. D., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Lawson-Johnston, A. McW., Lieut. (Died of wounds.)
    Layland-Barratt, F. H. G., Lieut.
    Leigh-Pemberton, R. D., Lieut. (R.F.C.).
    Lovell, W. H., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Lygon, Hon. R., Lieut.-Col., M.V.O.
    Lyttelton, O., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.), D.S.O.
    Maclear, B. G. H., Lieut. (Killed in action.)
    Manners, Hon. F. H., Lieut.
    Mildmay, A. S. L. St. J., Lieut.
    Moller, A. A., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Morgan, H. B. G., Lieut.
    Nash, C. S., Lieut.
    Neill, E. M., 2nd Lieut.
    Neville, W. W. S. C., Lieut. (Temp. Capt.).
    Newton, C. N., Capt.
    Osborne, B. R., 2nd Lieut.
    Osborne, R. B., Lieut.
    Palmer, R. H. R., Lieut.
    Parnell, Hon. W. A. D., Lieut. (Killed in action.)
    V.C. Paton, G. H. T., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.) (Killed in action.)
    Pauling, G. F., Lieut. (Killed in action.)
    Pearson-Gregory, P. J. S., Capt.
    Penn, A. H., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Pike, E. J. L., Major (Temp. Lieut.-Col.).
    V.C. Pryce, T. T., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.). (Missing.)
    Riddiford, D. H. S., Lieut.
    Ridley, E. D., Capt.
    Ritchie, A. T. A., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Selby-Lowndes, J. W. F., Lieut.
    Sheppard, E., Capt., D.S.O.
    Simmons, P. G., Lieut.
    Simpson, J. H. C., Capt.
    Skinner, L. P., 2nd Lieut. (Guards M.G.R.).
    Sloane-Stanley, H. H., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.). (Killed in action.)
    Smith, D. A., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Spence, P. M., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Spencer-Churchill, E. G., Capt.
    Stanhope, Earl, Major (Temp. Lieut.-Col.), D.S.O.
    Stanley, E. M. C., Lord, Capt.
    Stewart, W. A. L., Capt. (Killed in action.)
    Teece, J., Hon. Capt. and Quartermaster.
    Thornhill, N., Lieut.
    Trench, R. P. le P., Lieut.
    Tuckwell, E. H., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Vereker, G. G. M., Lieut.
    Vernon, H. B., Lieut.
    Wall, G. H., Capt. and Quartermaster.
    Wales, H.R.H. The Prince of, Capt. (Temp. Major), K.G., G.C.M.G.,
      G.B.E.
    Walker, C. F. A., Capt. (Actg. Major).
    Walker, P. M., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Wellesley, Lord G., Capt. (Temp. Lieut.-Col.), R.F.C.
    West, R. G., Lieut.
    Wiggins, H. G., Lieut.
    Wilson, G. B., Capt.
    Wolrige-Gordon, R., Capt.
    Wrixon, M. P. B., Lieut.


                             BAR TO "M.C."

    Adair, A. H. S., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.), M.C.
    Cornforth, J. C., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.), M.C.
    Fryer, E. R. M., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.), M.C.
    Neville, W. W. S. C., Lieut. (Temp. Major), M.C.
    Pryce, T. T., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.), V.C., M.C. (Missing.)
    Simpson, J. H. C., Capt., M.C.
    Spence, P. M., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).


                         SECOND BAR TO "M.C."

    Cornforth, J. C., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.), M.C.

                               "G.B.E."

    Field-Marshal H.R.H. The Duke of Connaught and Strathearn (25-8-17).
    Captain (Temp. Major) H.R.H. The Prince of Wales, K.G., M.C., and
      to be Grand Master of the Order (22-6-17).


                               "K.B.E."

    Bedford, H. A., Duke of, Col., K.G., A.D.C.
    Guthrie, C. T. R. S., Lieut.


                               "C.B.E."

    Ardee, R. le N., Lord, Col. (Temp. Brig.-Gen.), C.B.
    Bigham, Hon. C. C., Capt., Bt.-Major (Temp. Lieut.-Col.), C.M.G.
    Glanusk, J. H. R., Lord, Major and Hon. Col., C.B., D.S.O.
    Hobart, C. V. C., Lieut.-Col., D.S.O.
    Northumberland, A. I., Duke of, Major (Bt.-Lieut.-Col.).
    Trotter, G. F., Major, Bt.-Lieut.-Col. (Temp. Brig.-Gen.), C.B.,
      C.M.G., D.S.O., M.V.O.


                               "O.B.E."

    Blundell-Hollinshead-Blundell, C. L., Lieut. (Temp. Major).
    Gregson, L. M., Major.
    Hood, G. A. A., Viscount, Major (Temp. Lieut.-Col.).
    Hubbard, J. F., Lieut. (Temp. Lieut.-Col.).
    Legh, Hon. P. W., Capt.
    Lessing, A. E., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Mitchell, C., Capt. (Temp. Major), D.S.O.
    Rose, I. St. C., Capt.
    Seymour, E., Capt. (Temp. Major), D.S.O., M.V.O.
    Taylor, G. P. du Plat, Major.
    Vivian, G. N., Capt. (Actg. Major).
    Webster, Sir A. F., Bart., Capt. (Temp. Major).


                               "M.B.E."

    Eyre, J. B., Lieut. (Temp. Capt.).


                     SPECIAL AND BREVET PROMOTIONS


      _To be Lieutenant-General:_

    Cavan, Major-Gen. (Temp. Lieut.-Gen.) The Earl of, K.P., K.C.B., M.V.O.
    Davies, Major-Gen. (Temp. Lieut.-Gen.) Sir F. J., K.C.B., K.C.M.G.
    Lloyd, Major-Gen. Sir F., K.C.B., C.V.O., D.S.O.


      _To be Major-General:_

    Cavan, Col. (Temp. Brig.-Gen.) The Earl of, K.P., K.C.B., M.V.O.
    Gathorne-Hardy, Lieut.-Col., Bt.-Col. (Temp. Major-Gen.) Hon. J. F.,
      C.B., D.S.O.
    Gleichen, Col. (Temp. Brig.-Gen.) A. E. W., Count, K.C.V.O., C.B.,
      C.M.G., D.S.O.
    Loch, Lieut.-Col., Bt.-Col. (Temp. Brig.-Gen.) E. D., Lord, C.B.,
      C.M.G., D.S.O., M.V.O.
    Ruggles-Brise, Col. (Temp. Major-Gen.) H. G., C.B., M.V.O.


      _To be Brevet-Colonel:_

    Clive, Lieut.-Col. G. S., C.B., D.S.O.
    Corkran, Lieut.-Col. (Temp. Brig.-Gen.) C. E., C.M.G.
    Gathorne-Hardy, Lieut.-Col. (Temp. Brig.-Gen.) Hon. J. F., C.B.,
      D.S.O.
    Jeffreys, Bt.-Lieut.-Col. (Temp. Major-Gen.) G. D., C.B., C.M.G.
    Loch, Lieut.-Col. (Temp. Brig.-Gen.) E. D., Lord, C.B., C.M.G.,
      D.S.O., M.V.O.
    Murray-Threipland, W. (Temp. Col.), D.S.O.
    Sheldrake, Surg.-Lieut.-Col. E. N.


      _To be Brevet-Colonel in Reserve of Officers:_

    Pereira, Lieut.-Col. (Temp. Brig.-Gen.) G. E., C.B., C.M.G., D.S.O.


      _To be Brevet-Lieutenant-Colonel:_

    Colston, Major (Temp. Brig.-Gen.) Hon. E. M., C.M.G., D.S.O., M.V.O.
    Crespigny, Major (Temp. Brig.-Gen.) C. R. C. de, C.M.G., D.S.O.
    Leatham, Major (Actg. Lieut.-Col.) R. E. K., D.S.O.
    Jeffreys, Major (Temp. Major-Gen.) G. D., C.B., C.M.G.
    Pike, Major (Temp. Lieut.-Col.) E. J. L., M.C.
    Scott, Major Lord F. G. M. D., D.S.O.
    Sergison-Brooke, Major (Temp. Brig.-Gen.) B. N., D.S.O.
    Seymour, Major Lord H. C., D.S.O.
    Vivian, Major V., C.M.G., D.S.O., M.V.O.
    Hermon-Hodge, Major R. H., D.S.O., M.V.O.


      _To be Brevet-Lieutenant-Colonel in Reserve of Officers:_

    Gascoigne, Brevet-Major (Hon. Brig.-Gen.) E. F. O., C.M.G., D.S.O.
    Northumberland, A. I., Duke of (Brevet-Major).
    Stanley, Brevet-Major (Temp. Brig.-Gen.) Hon. F. C., D.S.O.
    Trotter, Major (Temp. Lieut.-Col.) G. F., C.B., C.M.G., D.S.O.,
      M.V.O.
    White, Major G. D.


      _To be Brevet-Major:_

    Bailey, Hon. W. R., D.S.O.
    Barrington-Kennett, Capt. B. H. (With Royal Flying Corps.)
    Rasch, Capt. (Actg. Lieut.-Col.) G. E. C., D.S.O.
    Gort, Capt. J. S. S. P. V., Viscount, D.S.O., M.V.O., M.C.
    Grey, R., D.S.O.
    Pilcher, Capt. W. S. (Temp. Major), D.S.O.
    Aubrey-Fletcher, Capt. H. L., D.S.O., M.V.O.
    Symons, Capt. T. E. R.


      _To be Brevet-Major in Reserve of Officers:_

    Bigham, Capt. (Temp. Lieut.-Col.) Hon. C. C., C.M.G.
    Cary, Capt. Hon. L. P. (Master of Falkland).
    Fisher-Rowe, Capt. C. V., M.C.
    Glyn, Capt. (Temp. Major) A. St. L.
    Percy, Lord W. R., Capt. (Temp. Lieut.-Col.), D.S.O.
    Percy, Capt. A. I., Earl.
    Stanley, Capt. (Temp. Brig.-Gen.) Hon. F. C., D.S.O.
    Tryon, Capt. G. C., M.P.
    Williams, Capt. M. (Actg. Lieut.-Col.).


      _Granted next Higher Rate of Pay:_

    Acraman, Hon. Lieut, and Quartermaster W. E., D.C.M.
    Teece, Hon. Lieut, and Quartermaster J.


      _To be Hon. Colonel under Act 77 R.W.:_

    Pakenhem (Temp. Lieut.-Col.), H. A., C.M.G.


      _To be Hon. Lieut.-Colonel:_

   Garton, Quartermaster and Hon. Major W. G. A. (Ret. Pay)
   Household Cavalry. (Supplement to London Gazette of 8th August
   1917).




                             APPENDIX VII

                                REWARDS

                 WARRANT AND NON-COMMISSIONED OFFICERS
                                AND MEN


                                "V.C."

    Batt.   Name.            Rank.        Regtl. No.    Remarks.

      1  Barber, E.        Guardsman      15518      Killed in action.
      1  Fuller, W. D.     L.-Cpl.        15624      Discharged.
      2  Holmes, W. E.     Guardsman      16796      Killed in action.
      3  Rhodes, J. H.     A. Sergt.      15122      Killed in action.


                               "M.B.E."

         R. S. Fawcett, W. Suptg.-Clk.     9058


                                "M.C."

      3  Aiers, G. A.      C.S.M.         13348
         Clay, S. R.       C.S.M.         30644
      4  Fremlin, E. J.    A.D.S.         12675
      3  Hill, A. M.       S.M.            5163
      1  Hughes, W.        S.M.           11487
      4  Littler, J.       S.M.            8380
                                                 { Killed during Air
      2  Ludlow, E.        S.M.            4947  { Raid in London.
                                                 { To Com. in Rgt.
         Payne, F. J. P.   T.R.S.M.       12096    Attached 7th Bn.
                                                   London Regt.
         Wall, J.          T.R.S.M.        9671    Attached H.A.C.


                               "D.C.M."

      4  Abell, W. R.          Guardsman    21887  Discharged.
      2  Acton, A.             Guardsman    23299
      2  Albone, W.            Sergeant     10807  Discharged.
      2  Atkinson, C.          A. Sergt.    13679
      2  Austin, E. J.         A.R.S.M.     14231
      4  Baker, A. A.          Sergeant     15477
      2  Ball, W.              Guardsman    16884  Discharged.
      2  Barber, F. L.         L.-Sergt.    23919
      2  Barton, T.            A. Cpl.      15529
      2  Beard, R., M.M.       C.S.M. (D/S) 12909
      2  Beer, W.              A. Sergt.    15074
         Belcher, W. W.        Sergeant     16634
      2  Bennett, A.           C.S.M.       11755
      3  Bennett, J.           L.-Cpl.      29198
      4  Billing, F. H.        L.-Cpl.      13029
      2  Birtles, F.           Corporal     24989
      2  Blackburn, R., M.M.   Sergeant     22949
      1  Booth, T.             Guardsman    26323
      1  Boreham, G. W.        C.S.M.       14277
      3  Bray, W. J.           Sergeant     19264
      1  Brown, T. W.          Q.M.S.        8277
      3  Browning, C. E., M.M. L.-Sergt.    20600
      2  Bull, H.              Guardsman    17063  Killed in action.
      4  Burtt-Massey, R.      Corporal     28181
      4  Canham, J.            Sergeant     15247
      2  Carter, E.            Sergeant     18523
         Caulfield, J.         Guardsman    20124
      1  Charlton, H. J.       Sergeant     16363
      2  Clarke, W. H.         Guardsman    14472
      1  Cole, H. E., M.M.     Sergeant     16651
         Cooke, F. A.          Col.-Sergt.   3825  With Lon. Rgt.
                                                   to Commission.
      2  Cooney, W.            Guardsman     8282  Discharged.
      4  Cooper, W. S.         Sergeant     19583  Died from disease.
      3  Copping, E.           Q.M.S.       13742
      2  Corrigan, T.          Guardsman    14358
      3  Coulton, E., M.M.     L.-Cpl.      22054  Died of wounds.
      4  Cunliffe, J.          Guardsman    21493
      2  Davies, H.            L.-Sergt.    18191
      4  Day, E. W.            A.D.S.       11086
      4  Dickens, T. J.        A. Cpl.      23763  Acc. killed.
      2  Diley, A.             L.-Cpl.      25256
      1  Dufty, W. J.          Guardsman    16952  Killed in action.
      4  Dyer, R.              Guardsman    21737
      2  Fincham, J.           A. L.-Sergt. 16318
      4  Flaycock, S.          Guardsman    12791
      1  Fleming, J.           L.-Cpl.      22939
      3  Fleming, W.           L.-Cpl.      28198
      4  Fletcher, G.          Guardsman    14238
      1  Frost, E.             C.S.M.        8421  Died of wounds.
      2  Gardiner, H.          L.-Cpl.      15770
      2  Gladders, H.          Guardsman    17244
      2  Godfrey, W. E., M.M.  Guardsman    12347
      3  Grant, W.             Sergeant     13334
      1  Green, R. B.          Corporal     12479
      2  Greenwood, J.         L.-Cpl.      24877  Discharged med.
                                                   unfit.
      4  Grundy, J.            Guardsman    11477
      3  Habberjam, W.         L.-Sergt.    20614
      2  Harrison, J. C.       Corporal     13841  Killed in action.
      1  Hayter, J.            L.-Cpl.      13558  Discharged.
      4  Hemsley, C.           A. Cpl.      27312
      3  Hennefer, L.          L.-Sergt.    23050
      1  Heslington, P. J. A.  Guardsman    13171
      3  Hewitt, D.            Guardsman    12657  Discharged.
      4  Higgins, J.           Sergeant     11588  Discharged.
      3  Hill, A. M.           R.S.M.        5163
      2  Hind, L.              Guardsman    17406
      3  Hobden, F.            L.-Cpl.      24524
      3  Hockings, R.          C.S.M.       11315
      4  Hogbin, G. E.         Guardsman    11434
      2  Holness, H. H. J.     Sergeant     10974  To Commission.
      4  Horan, M.             L.-Cpl.      20177
      1  Hull, S.              Sergeant     15310  To M.G. Guards.
      1  Hulmes, J.            L.-Cpl.      14707  Discharged.
      2  Hunter, G. M.         Guardsman    31698
      1  Jarman, J. H.         Sergeant     15087
      1  Jefferies, G.         Guardsman    24532
      1  Jenkins, J.           Guardsman    16551
      1  Johnston, A. W.       Guardsman    30354
      2  Jones, D. J.          Guardsman    10475  Discharged.
         Jones, E.             T.S.M.        5491  Discharged.
      1  Jones, S.             Sergeant     15650  To Commission.
      1  Jones, H.             Sergeant     11916  Died of wounds.
      2  Lack, W. B.           Sergeant     10840  Died of wounds.
      2  Lamplugh, C.          L.-Sergt.    14492
         Lane, H. W.           Guardsman    15585  To M.G. Guards.
      1  Langley, W. J.        Sergeant     14620  Died.
      3  Latta, W.             L.-Cpl.      11372
      1  Lavers, W. H.         Sergeant     17070
      2  Leach, A. E., M.M.    C.S.M.       11783
      2  Littler, J.           S.M.          8380
      1  Llewellyn, D.         Guardsman    20674
      2  Lyes, J. W.           L.-Cpl.      13922
      2  Lyon, J.              A. Sergt.    10371  Killed in action.
      3  Marks, F., M.M.       C.S.M.       15261
      1  Martin, W.            Sergeant     18457
      1  Masterman, G. H.      C.S.M.       15175
      2  McCaffrey, A. E.      L.-Sergt.    15802
      2  McCune, A.            Sergeant     12819
      2  McDonnell, P.         L.-Cpl.      16202  To Welsh Gds.
      2  Midwinter, A.         Sergeant     16522
      2  Miller, G. H.         Sergeant     11182
      1  Millichap, C. P.      Guardsman    22540
      1  Mills, A. J.          A. Sergt.    14772  Killed in action.
      4  Milton, W.            L.-Cpl.      24195
      4  Morgan, H. J.         Guardsman    16479  Killed in action.
      2  Murrell, E.           Sergeant     14503  Discharged.
      3  Norman, H. J.         L.-Sergt.    15111
      4  Norton, J.            C.S.M.       10330
      3  Oakley, T.            L.-Cpl.      23321
      1  Oldfield, S.          Guardsman    22169
      4  Palethorpe, T. R.     Sergeant      7395
      2  Parker, J.            A. Cpl.      18576
      2  Parkinson, A.         Guardsman    15189  Killed in action.
         Parry, J.             L.-Cpl.      15294
      1  Parnwell, F.          Sergeant     15512
      4  Peacock, G. J.        Sergeant     16372
      2  Penn, H. V.           Drummer      15486
      1  Perceval, W., M.M.    C.S.M.       11591
      1  Phippen, T. C. M.     Sergeant     11467
      4  Pitt, A.              C.Q.M.S.     16390
      3  Pole, F.              C.S.M.       14858
      2  Purnell, C. H.        Guardsman    13778
      2  Randell, G.           L.-Cpl.      27833
      2  Rhodes, J. H.         A. Sergt.    15122  Died of wounds.
      4  Richmond, R.          A. Sergt.    26550
      1  Riley, J.             L.-Cpl.      12221  Discharged.
      2  Roberts, J. R.        Guardsman    15418
      3  Roe, B.               A. L.-Cpl.   24124
      2  Roots, W. J.          Guardsman    15478
         Rudlin, W. E.         Sergeant     14597  To M.G. Guards.
      2  Sharp, G.             Sergeant     14369
      3  Simm, J. T.           Guardsman    21709
      1  Smith, A. E.          C.Q.M.S.     12597
      1  Smith, J. W.          L.-Cpl.      14427
         Snook, F.             C.S.M.        9797  To Commission.
      3  Spouge, W., M.M.      Guardsman    16650
      2  Spowage, A.           Sergeant     13211  Killed in action.
      2  Stannard, C. H.       Guardsman    27684
      3  Stevenson, W.         Sergeant      9575
      4  Sweetman, W. N.       L.-Cpl.      19678
      4  Taylor, W.            Guardsman    28895
      2  Thomas, G. H.         Sergeant     13486  To Welsh Gds.
      2  Thomas, J.            Sergeant     14801
      2  Thomas, W.            L.-Cpl.      14471  Killed in action.
      4  Todd, W. J.           Guardsman    24814
      2  Topps, F.             Guardsman    14034
      2  Tullett, H.           Guardsman    17892
      2  Turner, G. F. G.      Corporal     24658
      3  Twiss, C.             Sergeant     17018
      2  Tyrell, A.            Guardsman    15394
      3  Unsworth, H.          L.-Cpl.      20479
      1  Warner, J. W.         Guardsman    11839  Killed in action.
      4  Waterfall, T.         A. Sergt.    13713
      3  Watson, J. W.         L.-Cpl.      27844
      3  Watts, A. S., M.M.    Sergeant     13353
      1  Whitaker, W. G. R.    L.-Sergt.    19059  Killed in action.
      2  Williams, W.          Guardsman    14356  To M.F.P.
      3  Winter, W.            Sergeant     18101
      2  Wonnacott, T. J.      A.C.S.M.     15400
      2  Wood, H.              S.M.          5225  To Com. in Rgt.
      1  Worton, H., M.M.      Sergeant     12498
      4  Wright, P.            Sergeant     16557  To Commission.
      2  Young, C.             L.-Cpl.      24174


                            BAR TO "D.C.M."

      2  Rhodes, J. H.         A. Sergt.    15122  Died of wounds.


                                "M.M."

      2  Acland, G.            L.-Cpl.      25610
      2  Adams, L. B.          Sergeant     19390
      2  Aderly, P. S.         A. Sergt.    15353  Discharged.
      3  Alderson, R.          Guardsman    24371  Killed in action.
         Alexander, R.         Sergeant     13394  To M.G. Guards.
      1  Anderson, H. J.       A. Sergt.    26602
      1  Angulatta, C.         L.-Sergt.    18239
      2  Arrowsmith, J.        Guardsman    24679  Killed in action.
      1  Ashcroft, J.          Sergeant      6382
      3  Ashe, W.              L.-Sergt.    23284
      2  Ashworth, J. J.       L.-Sergt.    17825
      3  Ashworth, R. H.       L.-Cpl.      20432
      2  Askew, J.             L.-Cpl.      18418  Attached 1st Gds.
                                                    Bde. T.M.B.
      4  Askey, I.             Guardsman    21851
      2  Aust, C.              Guardsman    22719
      3  Austin, A.            Guardsman    15190
      2  Austin, W. T.         L.-Sergt.    11020  To Commission.
      1  Bailey, H. O.         Corporal     12393
      2  Bailey, G.            Guardsman    21214
      1  Baker, J.             Guardsman    28475
      2  Baker, W. H.          C.Q.M.S.     14809
      1  Baker, W.             L.-Cpl.      16832
      1  Baggott, J.           Guardsman    26689
      2  Bagley, G.            Guardsman    25536
      2  Bamping, J.           Guardsman    30364
      4  Bancroft, J.          Guardsman    26573
      3  Bannister, F. C.      L.-Cpl.      22639
      2  Baptist, M.           Guardsman    16274
      1  Barber, D. S.         Guardsman    22800  To M.G. Guards.
      4  Barker, S. L.         L.-Cpl.      18708  To R.E.
      2  Batchelor, E. T.      Guardsman    25614
      2  Beard, R.             A.S.M.       12909
      1  Beaton, K.            Guardsman    18591
      2  Beever, W.            Guardsman    28086
      4  Belcher, T.           A. Sergt.    20912
      3  Belither, R.          Guardsman    18806
      3  Belleini, A. F. W.    Guardsman    27210
      2  Benjamin, W.          Guardsman    17212
      2  Bennett, C. G. F.     L.-Cpl.      16194  Discharged.
      2  Bennett, D.           Sergeant     19112  Died of wounds.
      2  Bennett, O. J.        L.-Cpl.      29850
      3  Bennett, H.           L.-Sergt.    21974
      1  Benstead, R.          Guardsman    14114  Discharged.
      4  Bent, J.              Guardsman    21023  Missing.
      2  Bentley, J.           Guardsman    19370
      2  Benton, J. W.         Guardsman    22788
      1  Bickerstaff, J.       Guardsman    25596
      1  Biggin, T.            Guardsman    11671
      3  Bignell, F.           Guardsman    10966  To Labour Corps.
      1  Billing, F. H.        L.-Cpl.      13029
      3  Bird, J.              Guardsman    26808
      2  Blackwell, J. H.      C.S.M.       11300
      3  Bland, E.             Guardsman    31513
      2  Blackburn, L.         Sergeant     22949
      2  Blanks, E. G.         Guardsman    30484
      3  Blasdale, P. J.       Guardsman    11896
      3  Blundy, R. E.         L.-Cpl.      14603
      3  Bond, B.              Guardsman    16774
      3  Booth, F.             L.-Cpl.      21338
      4  Booth, C. W.          Corporal     22559
      2  Bosworth, J.          Sergeant     10627  Killed in action.
      2  Boyle, J.             Guardsman    20231
      1  Boyles, E.            C.Q.M.S.     14220  Discharged.
      1  Bradshaw, E. C.       Guardsman    23879
      2  Bray, W. J., D.C.M.   Sergeant     19264
      2  Brierly, P.           Guardsman    23981
      1  Bright, W.            L.-Sergt.    17014
      4  Broadfoot, J.         L.-Cpl.      20817  Missing.
      4  Brown, C.             L.-Sergt.    23152  Killed in action.
      1  Brown, C. F.          Sergeant     18249
      4  Brown, J. A.          Sergeant     16620
      3  Browning, C. E.       L.-Sergt.    20600
      4  Brownsell, W. I.      Guardsman    22264  Discharged.
      3  Bryan, W. K.          A. Sergt.    13494
      2  Bryant, W. T. H.      L.-Cpl.      16400
      3  Buchan, C. M.         L.-Sergt.    24143
      4  Buckle, E.            Sergeant     15494  Killed in action.
      1  Burchett, J. G.       Sergeant     17810
      2  Burrows, E.           Guardsman    18594
      3  Burrows, S. N.        L.-Sergt.    24768
      1  Burke, V.             Corporal     11203  Killed in action.
      3  Burke, W.             Sergeant     16530
      2  Burton, C. H.         Guardsman    23010
      2  Burton, A. C.         Guardsman    18288  To Labour Corps.
      1  Burton, S.            Sergeant     10593
      1  Calder, H.            L.-Sergt.    17228
      4  Canham, J.            Sergeant     15247
      1  Carpenter, S.         L.-Cpl.      12822
      3  Carter, A.            Guardsman    21193
      2  Carter, E.            L.-Sergt.    21720
      1  Carter, F. J.         Sergeant     11043  To Commission.
      1  Carter, J.            Guardsman    28098
      1  Carter, W. M.         Guardsman    30387
      1  Casey, P.             Sergeant     13945
      3  Challis, J. A.        L.-Sergt.    22783  Died of wounds.
      1  Chambers, E. G.       Guardsman    21206
      2  Chapman, D. W.        A.C.Q.M.S.    8711
      1  Chapman, H.           Guardsman    12795
      2  Chivers, A. E.        Guardsman    24053
         Churchman, J. A.      Guardsman    25060
      2  Churchyard, H.        Guardsman    28408
      1  Clark, C. W.          Sergeant     18062  To Commission.
      1  Clark, E.             Guardsman    17241
      2  Clarke, W. H.         L.-Cpl.      14472  Discharged.
      4  Clarkson, J.          Guardsman    17542  Died of wounds.
      4  Clay, J.              Guardsman    20805  Discharged.
      3  Clayton, C.           Guardsman    21282
      4  Clayton, W.           Guardsman    16383
      3  Clegg, H.             Guardsman    20573
      1  Cliff, N. D.          Guardsman    22360
      3  Clowes, A.            L.-Sergt.    25266
         Cole, A. J.           Guardsman    25687
      2  Cole, H. A.           Guardsman    28233
      2  Cole, H. W.           Guardsman    24652
      1  Coles, H. E.          Sergeant     16651
      4  Coles, W. H.          Guardsman     8663
      2  Colgate, R. E.        Sergeant     14914  To Commission.
      4  Collett, J. W. H.     L.-Cpl.      21876
         Collier, J.           L.-Cpl.      23934
         Collier, T.           L.-Cpl.      18568
      1  Collings, E. C.       Guardsman    10061
      1  Collins, E.           Guardsman    18143
      3  Cook, A. H.           L.-Sergt.    19467  Killed in action.
      1  Cooke, S.             Sergeant     15664
      3  Coombs, B.            Guardsman    26170
      3  Coonan, T.            Guardsman    18123  To M.G. Guards.
         Cooper, F.            Guardsman    21950  To R.E.
      4  Cooper, W. S.         Guardsman    19583  Died.
      4  Corcoran, J.          Guardsman    21753
      2  Coton, A.             Guardsman    21392
      3  Coulton, E.           L.-Cpl.      22054
      2  Coutts, H. F.         Guardsman    24718
      2  Coward, W. H.         Guardsman    24790
      3  Cowling, W.           A. L.-Cpl.   28575
      1  Cox, A. L.            Sergeant     13959
      2  Cox, J.               L.-Cpl.      13475
      1  Crick, F.             Guardsman    14818
      4  Crompton, P.  A.      Cpl.         20392
      3  Cronin, D.            Guardsman    11492  Discharged.
         Cross, S.             Guardsman    24497
      1  Croucher, R.          A.C.S.M.     11034
      1  Dalling, F.           Guardsman    26667
      4  Darlington, G.        Guardsman    12901  Killed in action.
      1  Davidson, S.          Guardsman    18181
      2  Davies, W.  O.R.      Sergt.       17780
         Davis, T. W.          Guardsman    28294
      4  Dawson, J.            Guardsman    23402
      2  Day, A.               Sergeant     18711
      2  Dean, R.              L.-Cpl.      19317
      4  Deane, F. J.          L.-Cpl.      17187  Killed in action.
      3  Dench, E.             Guardsman    29476
      4  Dennison, T.          Guardsman    21611
      4  Devy, G.              Corporal     18167
      2  Dew, A. W.            Guardsman    30493
      2  Dewick, H. B.         Sergeant     15821
      3  Dickenson, J.         Guardsman    28755
      3  Dickson, R.           Sergeant     11900
      2  Dighton, W.           Guardsman    23260
      3  Dix, H.               L.-Sergt.    22974
         Dobson, W. H.         Sergeant     13610  To M.G. Guards.
      4  Docking, R. J.        L-.Cpl.      20151
      2  Donson, H.            Guardsman    16485
      3  Dore, J. G.           Sergeant     14547
      2  Downes, W.            Guardsman    20848
      1  Downs, W. T.          Guardsman    18155
      1  Drew, F.              Guardsman    30326
      2  Drinkwater, P. S.     Guardsman    11183
      1  Driver, G.            Sergeant     15696
      3  Duddell, H. L.        Guardsman    30054
      2  Duddy, J. L.          L.-Cpl.      17551
      4  Duffield, R.          Guardsman    24315
      3  Dunn, G. W.           Sergeant     12138  Died of wounds.
      3  Eason, J. E.          C.S.M.       11041
      2  Eccleshall, C.        Sergeant     15574
      1  Eggleton, H. J.       Guardsman    26636
      1  Eglington, H.         L.-Cpl.      18785
         Elliott, W.           L.-Cpl.      27067
      4  England, J.           Guardsman    10945
      3  England, R. A.        Guardsman    27259
      2  English, G.           Guardsman    26368
      1  Ewell, R. C.          O.R.C.       17673
         Eyre, G. R.           L.-Cpl.      23638
         Famfield, C. W.       Guardsman    24646
      3  Fasham, A.            Guardsman    17504
      1  Fenton, E.            Guardsman    18873  Killed in action.
      3  Figgis, J.            Guardsman    20345
      3  Files, C. H.          Guardsman    16674
      4  Finch, W. H.          A. Sergt.    19017
      2  Fincham, J.           A. L.-Sergt. 16318
      2  Fitch, S. G.          Guardsman    12744
         Fleming, J.           L.-Cpl.      22939
      2  Fletcher, J.          Guardsman    16193
      1  Folke, L. W.          Guardsman    24301
      4  Foster, G.            Guardsman    26408
         Foster, F.            Guardsman    30061
         Fox, A. E.            L.-Sergt.    15761  To M.G. Guards.
         Frost, E.             L.-Sergt.    12882
      1  Fryer, G. E.          Guardsman    13130
      4  Fuller, G.            Guardsman    26188
      4  Furness, E.           Sergeant     21568
      4  Gale, B. A.           Guardsman    28387  Died of wounds.
      2  Galley, P. H.         Guardsman    27141  To A.P.C.
      2  Gambrill, W. F.       C.Q.M.S.     13317
      2  Gardiner, H.          L.-Cpl.      15770
      4  Garlick, G.           Sergeant     11670
      1  Gaskin, C.            L.-Cpl.      16233  Killed in action.
      4  Gibbs, G. A.          L.-Cpl.      21170
      2  Gibson, G. W.         L.-Cpl.      16653
      2  Gipson, J.            Guardsman    14116
      2  Glendenning, J.       Guardsman    28999
      2  Godfrey, W. E.        Guardsman    12347
      1  Golding, W. C.        A.C.Q.M.S.   14771
      3  Goodchild, J. H.      Guardsman    31967
         Gould, C.             Sergeant     11197  To M.G. Guards.
      3  Graham, F. H.         Guardsman    24534
      3  Grant, W.             Sergeant     13334  To K.O.Y.L.I.
         Grayson, T. H.        L.-Cpl.      20055
      2  Greenhalf, W. G.      Guardsman    12191
      3  Greenwood, C.         Sergeant     11579  To Commission.
      1  Griffin, G. J.        Sergeant     23304
      1  Griffiths, J.         Guardsman     9849  Discharged.
      1  Griffiths, E. J.      Guardsman    12259
      3  Grindley, H.          Guardsman    24467
      3  Haizelden, S.         Guardsman    14569
      4  Hales, C.             Guardsman    19110
      4  Hall, H.              Sergeant     21589
      3  Hall, A. G.           L.-Sergt.    16723
      1  Halls, J.             Guardsman    18001
         Hallworth, W.         L.-Cpl.      25106
      4  Hames, H. F.          A. Cpl.      22373
      3  Hams, C.              L.-Cpl.      15508
         Hanis, D. J.          Guardsman    18839
      2  Hankinson, W.         Guardsman    17431
      1  Harcourt, J.          L.-Sergt.    14002
      3  Harris, B.            Guardsman    18759
      1  Harrison, W.          Guardsman    20495
      3  Harrison, W. H.       Guardsman    28045
      3  Harrison, S. F.       L.-Cpl.      24982
      1  Hartga, T. G.         Guardsman    29122
      4  Hartley, M.           A. Sergt.    20768
      2  Hartshorn, C.         L.-Sergt.    13893
      1  Haslem, J.            Guardsman    13524
      4  Hatton, C. G.         Sergeant     13727  Killed in action.
      2  Hawcroft, A.          Guardsman    30499
      4  Haycock, S., D.C.M.   Guardsman    12791
      2  Hayes, A. R.          A. Sergt.    17225
         Haynes, E. W.         L.-Cpl.      22184
      4  Heap, J.              Guardsman    20183  To Labour Corps.
      3  Hearn, C.             C.S.M.       10372  Killed in action.
      1  Hearn, A. E.          L.-Cpl.      22772
      3  Hemming, A. F.        L.-Cpl.      23862
      4  Hickey, G. F.         Guardsman    16895
      3  Hickman, J. E.        L.-Sergt.    21162
      3  Hicks, W. T.          Sergeant     15556
      4  Higgins, H.           L.-Cpl.      21525  Killed in action.
      4  Higgins, J.           Sergeant     11588  Discharged.
         Higham, W.            L.-Cpl.      20476
      3  Hill, C.              L.-Cpl.      20403
      2  Hill, R. M.           Sergeant     15203
      1  Hindley, W.           Sergeant     21676
         Hiscock, C. H.        Guardsman    29542
      3  Hoare, F. J.          L.-Cpl.      20985
      2  Hodgson, A.           L.-Cpl.      22374
      4  Hodkinson, H.         Sergeant     15085
      4  Holland, A.           L.-Sergt.    21945  Discharged.
      2  Holliday, R.          Sergeant     11629
      4  Hollobone, F. R.      Guardsman    25820
         Holme, A.             Guardsman    11039
         Holmes, F. W.         L.-Cpl.      10668
      4  Hope, W. S.           Sergeant     12023  Discharged.
         Horler, R. J.         Guardsman    16613
      2  Horton, S.            Guardsman    17382
      4  Houston, R.           L.-Cpl.      20187
         Hubbard, J. W.        Sergeant     14217
      2  Huffer, C.            Guardsman    17355  Died of wounds.
      1  Hughes, F.            Guardsman    16489
      1  Hughes, L. A.         Guardsman    21141
      1  Hughes, T. W.         L.-Sergt.    16917
      1  Hulmes, J., D.C.M.    Sergeant     14707
      1  Humphrey, F. T.       Guardsman    16099
      1  Hunt, F.              Guardsman    26346
      3  Huntley, E. E.        L.-Cpl.      11031
      1  Illsley, L.           Guardsman    19932
      1  Illsley, W. J.        L.-Cpl.      21998
      3  Ingham, T.            Sergeant     12271
      1  Ironmonger, G.        Guardsman    18350
      2  Ivill, W.             L.-Sergt.    14655
      2  Jacobs, A. C.         L.-Cpl.      29681
      1  Jackson, A.           A. L.-Sergt. 18516
      3  James, E.             Guardsman    14811
      4  James, W. S. G.       L.-Cpl.      23188
      2  Jeanes, J. V.         Sergeant     12813
      2  Jeffreys, C. J.       Guardsman    12111
      1  Jenkins, J.           Guardsman    16551
      1  John, B.              L.-Sergt.    17719  Discharged.
      3  Jones, A.             L.-Cpl.      15804
      2  Jones, A.             Guardsman    17545  Died of wounds.
      1  Jones, A. F.          Sergeant     15128  Killed in action.
      1  Jones, G.             Guardsman    16985  Died of wounds.
      2  Jones, G. H.          Guardsman    20501  To M.G. Guards.
      1  Jones, H.             Guardsman    16132  To R.E.
      1  Jones, J.             C.Q.M.S.     13526  Discharged.
      4  Jones, R. E.          A. Cpl.      10981
      2  Jones, T. L. C.       L.-Cpl.      16167  To Commission.
      1  Jones, W.             Guardsman    14726
      4  Joyce, A.             Guardsman    12925
      1  Judson, W.            L.-Cpl.      13517
      3  Keate, A. E.          Guardsman    28598
      4  Keep, P.              Corporal     20346  Killed in action.
      3  Keggin, W.            L.-Cpl.      28533
      2  Kemp, A.              Guardsman    29083
      4  Kemp, C. W.           Corporal     21175  Missing.
      1  Kenlock, A. E.        Guardsman    12599
      3  Kent, W. J.           L.-Sergt.    19019
      1  Kenyon, T.            Guardsman    18012
      3  Keyte, J. G.          L.-Sergt.    14639
      3  Killington, H.        Sergeant     15888
         King, E. W.           Sergeant     15488  To M.G. Guards.
      3  Knight, E.            L.-Sergt.    15592
      1  Knowles, W.           Sergeant     14505
         Lacey, F. H.          L.-Cpl.      16447
      4  Laming, G. W.         Sergeant     14248
      1  Lancaster, G.         L.-Sergt.    15094
      4  Langford, A.          Guardsman    21768  Missing.
      3  Latta, W.             L.-Cpl.      11372
      1  Lavender, H.          L.-Cpl.      18531
      1  Lawrance, W. G.       Guardsman    10989
         Lawrence, J. A.       Guardsman    26997
      3  Lawrence, W.          Sergeant     14228
         Lawton, C.            Sergeant     16852
      2  Leach, A. E.          C.S.M.       11783
      2  Leech, E. C.          L.-Cpl.      12043
      1  Lewis, S. T.          Sergeant     13886  Killed in action.
         Lilley, W.            L.-Cpl.      15726  To M.G. Guards.
      3  Little, T.            Guardsman    20603
      4  Locke, F. C.          L.-Sergt.    19634  Killed in action.
      1  Lockley, J. T.        Guardsman    26141
      4  Lomas, J.             Guardsman    21684
      4  Long, W. F.           L.-Cpl.      24996
      3  Longrigg, J.          L.-Sergt.    23098
      4  Louth, A.             Corporal     17356
      4  Lowe, J.              Guardsman    24699
      1  Lowe, S.              A. L.-Cpl.   12674
      1  Luker, J.             L.-Sergt.    12910
      4  Lulham, F. G.         Guardsman    29568
      4  Lusty, E.             Corporal     11510
      4  Lynch, M.             Guardsman    23109
      2  Lyon, J.              Sergeant     10371  Killed in action.
      1  McCarrick, J.         Guardsman    18884
      4  McEvoy, D.            Guardsman    26621
      1  McGuin, T.            Guardsman    15013  Died of wounds.
      1  Machin, T. W.         Guardsman    14329  To R.E.
      1  McIntosh, W. A.       Guardsman    17863
      4  Madeley, F. G.        L.-Cpl.      19176  Discharged.
         Mannion, C.           Guardsman    20424  Att. 2nd Guards
                                                   Bde., M.G. Co.
      1  Mansell, H.           L.-Sergt.    15493
      3  Marks, F.             C.S.M.       15261
      4  Marriott, C. K.       C.S.M.       13729
      2  Marsden, J.           Guardsman    18332
      4  Marsh, H.             L.-Sergt.    20306  Missing.
      4  Marshall, A.          Guardsman    20437  Discharged.
         Marshall, W. J.       Guardsman    14449
      3  Martin, W. J. E.      Guardsman    20348
      4  Mason, B.             L.-Cpl.      14091
      1  Masterman, G. H.      C.Q.M.S.     15175
         Masterman, R.         Guardsman    28010
      2  Mawby, E.             L.-Sergt.    13725
      4  Mead, H. R.           Guardsman    27952
      4  Meikle, H. J.         Guardsman    20190
      1  Merchant, T.          Guardsman    13037
      1  Meredith, A.          L.-Sergt.    12634
      1  Meredith, E. H.       L.-Cpl.      22159  Killed in action.
      3  Merry, J. C.          Guardsman    24741
      2  Middleditch, J.       Guardsman    23992
      3  Miles, W.             L.-Sergt.    13109
      4  Miller, W.            A. Sergt.    13872
      2  Millins, F. J.        Guardsman    18379  Killed in action.
      2  Mills, A.             Guardsman    19520
      4  Millward, J.          Guardsman    20382
      1  Morris, M.            A.C.Q.M.S.   12640
      1  Morris, W.            Guardsman    10295
         Morton, W.            Guardsman    21656
      2  Moulding, J.          L.-Cpl.      25819  Died of wounds.
      1  Moulton, A.           A.C.S.M.      9712
      2  Moulton, T.           L.-Cpl.      27858
      3  Muff, L.              Guardsman    28190
      4  Mumford, R. J.        Guardsman    26304
      3  Munn, A.              L.-Cpl.      21384  Killed in action.
      4  Naylor, T.            Guardsman    21812  Killed in action.
      2  Neale, W.             Sergeant     13594
      2  Nelmes, E.            Guardsman    14296
      1  New, C. E.            Sergeant      8606
      4  Newell, B.            Corporal     20907
      2  Newman, H.            L.-Cpl.      14294
      3  Noble, T. E.          Sergeant     14477  To Commission.
      1  Norris, T.            Guardsman    24108
      4  Nottage, T. S.        A. Sergt.    22065
         Nuttall, A.           L.-Sergt.    20762
      3  Nuttall, H.           L.-Sergt.    11091  Killed in action.
      1  Oakes, G.             Guardsman    30462
      4  Oakes, H. W.          Sergeant     14716
      3  Ogden, E.             Guardsman    20127
      2  O'Neill, M.           Guardsman    11702
         O'Neill, T.           Guardsman    29946
      2  Orme, H.              L.-Cpl.      18514
      3  Packman, H. G.        Guardsman    21042
      1  Paddock, F.           Sergeant     16555  Discharged.
      1  Page, A. E.           Guardsman    23828  To M.G. Guards.
      2  Page, F.              Guardsman    24657
      3  Page, W. W.           Guardsman    20536  Discharged.
         Painter, W. J.        L.-Cpl.      27670
      1  Paintin, H.           Guardsman    12385
      1  Palfrey, E. G.        Corporal     12827  Killed in action.
      2  Paradine, H.          Sergeant     15209  Discharged.
      2  Parker, F. C.         Guardsman    12836
      3  Parker, A. A.         L.-Cpl.      15482
      4  Parry, E.             Guardsman    22014
      2  Parry, S. M.          Guardsman    26642
      3  Parry, W.             C.S.M.       10543  Discharged.
      3  Parsons, E. W.        A. Sergt.    19971
      3  Partington, J.        L.-Sergt.    23198
      3  Partington, W.        L.-Cpl.      22419
      4  Patefield, E.         L.-Cpl.      19523
      3  Pay, F.               L.-Cpl.      23442
      1  Payne, B. J.          L.-Cpl.      17493
      4  Payne, T.             Corporal     21109
      1  Payne, W.             Guardsman    26459
      2  Peach, J. R.          Guardsman    26727
      1  Pearce, F.            Sergeant     15222
      4  Pearson, A.           L.-Sergt.    28442
      2  Pearson, A. B.        L.-Sergt.    21868
      2  Pearson, T. H.        L.-Sergt.    13414  To Labour Corps.
      1  Pearson, W.           Sergeant     23936
      1  Percival, W.          C.S.M.       11591
         Perkins, H. B.        L.-Sergt.    16872
         Perrett, G.           Guardsman    31263
      1  Perry, H. N.          L.-Sergt.    18321
      1  Phippin, T. C. M.     Sergeant     11467
      3  Pike, H.              Guardsman    29197
      2  Pinnell, T.           Guardsman    15864
      2  Pitt, W.              L.-Sergt.     9334  Discharged.
         Plimmer, A. G.        Guardsman    35057
      4  Plummer, E. J.        Guardsman    26013
      3  Pollington, H.        Guardsman    20454
      1  Porter, B. R. M.      Sergeant     22909
      2  Portier, J.           Guardsman    22119
      3  Potter, E. P.         Sergeant     19942  Discharged.
      2  Potts, W.             Guardsman    20852
      1  Poulter, E. J.        L.-Cpl.      25329
      1  Powell, J. C.         C.Q.M.S.     15543
      4  Powlesland, J.        Guardsman    21563
         Pratt, G. H. M.       Guardsman    25664
         Preece, E. A.         L.-Cpl.      26646
      4  Price, H.             Sergeant     14689
      3  Price, J.             Guardsman    19948
      4  Price, W. J.          Guardsman    15637
      1  Price, W. T.          L.-Cpl.      29986
      3  Pugh, W. L.           L.-Cpl.      19273
      3  Pumfrey, H.           Guardsman    27018
      3  Purdy, T.             Sergeant     12987
      4  Ralph, W.             L.-Cpl.      21948
      1  Randall, E.           Guardsman    19149
      4  Ratcliffe, A. T.      Guardsman    18874
      4  Ratley, T.            L.-Cpl.      17353
      4  Reynolds, J.          L.-Cpl.      19643  Missing.
      3  Reynolds, G. A.       L.-Cpl.      24784
      3  Richards, F. H.       Guardsman    24713
      3  Richardson, R. N.     L.-Cpl.      18855
      2  Richardson, W.        A.C.Q.M.S.   17508
      4  Rider, C.             Guardsman    19156
      4  Roberts, T.           L.-Sergt.    16898  Discharged.
      3  Robertson, A.         L.-Sergt.    24770  To Labour Corps.
      2  Robinson, C. A.       A. Sergt.    13980
      4  Robinson, J. W.       L.-Cpl.      20219
      2  Robinson, J.          Guardsman    29474
      1  Robinson, S. J.       Guardsman    26311
      4  Robinson, T. W.       Guardsman    26887
      3  Rock, E. D.           Guardsman    25516
      2  Rockley, A.           Guardsman    15507
      4  Roden, H. H.          Guardsman    25551
      3  Rogers, H.            L.-Cpl.      26963  Died of wounds.
      2  Roper, W.             L.-Sergt.    16243
      4  Rose, T.              Guardsman    20684  To M.G. Guards.
      2  Rosendale, F. J.      Guardsman    15241  To M.G. Guards.
      3  Rossiter, O.          Guardsman    20539  Att. 2nd Guards
                                                    Bde., T.M.B.
                                                   Killed in action.
      4  Round, H.             Guardsman    21465
      1  Round, W. J.          Sergeant     14252
      4  Rowbotham, S. J.      L.-Cpl.      24266  Missing.
      4  Rowbotham, S. R.      Guardsman    27482
      1  Rowe, E. J.           C.Q.M.S.     14068
      4  Rowlett, J.           Sergeant     19211
      4  Rowley, W.            Guardsman    20900  To Labour Corps.
      3  Rudge, L. M.          Sergeant     15274  To Commission.
         Ryall, H. E.          A. Cpl.      16116  3rd Guards Bde.,
                                                   M.G. Comp.
                                                   Killed in action.
      2  Ryder, F.             Guardsman    14742
         Ryder, J.             L.-Cpl.      19473  Att. 1st Guards
                                                    Bde., T.M.B.
                                                   Died of wounds.
         Sargent, F. G.        Guardsman    15525
      3  Saunders, E. G.       L.-Cpl.      19013
      1  Saunders, H. F.       Guardsman    29124
      2  Saunders, J.          Guardsman    14165  Died of wounds.
      4  Saunders, R. W.       Guardsman    23665
      2  Schofield, F.         Guardsman    17527
         Scott, T.             L.-Cpl.      17433
      2  Scott, J.             L.-Cpl.      15411
      1  Scroggs, A. H.        Guardsman    15675
      2  Sears, F.             Sergeant     16533
      1  Seymour, H. C.        L.-Cpl.      16126  Killed in action.
      2  Sharp, G.             Sergeant     14369
      2  Sharples, W.          L.-Cpl.      27122
      4  Shaw, E.              Sergeant     13810
      1  Shaw, J.              Guardsman    22637
         Shaw, R.              Guardsman    15109
      3  Sheldon, E. S.        Guardsman    28862
      1  Shenton, F.           Sergeant      9936
      1  Shepherd, E.          Guardsman    24152
      1  Sherfield, F.         L.-Cpl.      22297  Att. 3rd Guards
                                                    Bde., M.G. Coy.
      1  Simpson, F. G.        Guardsman    15199
      3  Simpson, F. S.        Guardsman    16567
         Sims, E.              Guardsman    29203
      3  Skennerton, S.        Guardsman    24898
         Slater, T. R.         Guardsman    22134
      2  Smart, W.             Guardsman    27764
         Smith, A.             L.-Cpl.      14239  1st Guards Bde.,
                                                    M.G. Coy., to
                                                    M.G. Guards.
      4  Smith, E. V.          Guardsman    26281
      4  Smith, F.             L.-Cpl.      17076  Died of wounds.
      1  Smith, F. J.          Guardsman    14525
         Smith, G. T.          Guardsman    30380
      2  Smith, J. H.          A.C.Q.M.S.   11899
      2  Smith, J. H. W.       Guardsman    22934
      3  Smith, R. J.          Guardsman    11832
      4  Smith, T.             L.-Cpl.      19408
      4  Smith, T.             Guardsman    24343
      3  Smith, T. H.          L.-Cpl.      24635
      3  Spencer, J.           L.-Sergt.     9887
      1  Spicer, W. W.         Guardsman    22730
      3  Spouge, W.            L.-Cpl.      16650
      4  Spurr, J. W.          Guardsman    26394
      2  Squirrell, S. A.      L.-Cpl.      22633  Died of wounds.
      2  Stamp, H.             Guardsman    13865
      4  Stanley, T. W.        Guardsman    24446
         Stanton, A.           Corporal     17139  3rd Guards Bde.,
                                                    T.M.B.
         Stanton, W. T.        L.-Cpl.      30527
      4  Steele, J. A.         Guardsman    20464  To G.M.G.R.
      2  Stenning, A.          Guardsman    17252  Killed in action.
      3  Stephenson, G.  A.    Sergt.       23846
      2  Stevens, A.           Sergeant     13751
      3  Stevenson, H.         L.-Cpl.      18817  Killed in action.
      4  Stevenson, J. H.      Guardsman    14538
      2  Stockdale, F. J.      L.-Sergt.    12353  Killed in action.
      1  Street, H.            L.-Cpl.      24791  Died of wounds.
      4  Street, T. F.         Guardsman    20395
         Struggles, W.         Guardsman    25261
         Sudworth, J.          Sergeant     20359
      3  Summerscales, J.      Guardsman    21863
      1  Swan, L. S.           A.C.Q.M.S.   12794
      1  Swan, T.              Guardsman    17032
      1  Swift, T.             L.-Cpl.      25909
      4  Tapp, T.              L.-Sergt.    13279
      4  Taylor, E. C.         Sergeant     16271
      1  Taylor, G.            Sergeant     10784  Re-enl. New
                                                    No. 29878.
      3  Taylor, G. T.         Sergeant     15328
         Taylor, J. C.         Guardsman    29577
      2  Teagle, T.            L.-Cpl.      15058  Killed in action.
      4  Temple, F. B.         Guardsman    29983
      1  Thackwell, W.         Guardsman    23742
      2  Thomas, H. J.         Sergeant     6268
         Thomas, J., D.C.M.    Sergeant     14801
         Thomas, J.            A. L.-Cpl.   26751
      1  Thomas, W. J.         C.Q.M.S.     13716  Killed in action.
      2  Thompson, A. G.       A. Sergt.    16321
      1  Thompson, G. W.       Corporal     16326
      3  Thompson, J. T.       Sergeant     18795
      3  Thompson, W.          Guardsman    20194
      4  Thornton, A.          Guardsman    24294
      4  Thornton, J. F.       Guardsman    18615  Died of wounds.
      4  Thorpe, I. B.         Guardsman    24393
         Thraves, R.           Guardsman    13835
      2  Tickner, E. J.        Guardsman    25622
      3  Tilford, G.           A. L.-Cpl.   11450
      1  Titt, W.              Guardsman    18405  To Army Res.
      2  Tomkinson, J.         Guardsman    17129
      2  Tomlinson, J.         L.-Sergt.    13769
      1  Towns, H.             L.-Cpl.      26374
      4  Trotter, T.           Sergeant     20016
      1  Trueman, R. P.        Guardsman    26101
      4  Tunnell, W.           Sergeant      8596
      2  Turley, W.            Guardsman    18724
      3  Turner, A. G.         A. L.-Sergt. 23863
      3  Underhill, H. G.      Guardsman    20458
      4  Venn, S. E.           Guardsman    15813
      3  Voce, G.              Guardsman    16539
      3  Voyce, W.             L.-Cpl.      25135
      3  Wainwright, W.        L.-Cpl.      23199
      1  Walker, G. R.         A. L.-Sergt. 18282
      2  Wall, A.              L.-Cpl.      12704  Killed in action.
      3  Wall, W. J. H.        L.-Cpl.      25072
         Waller, J.            Guardsman    16514
      2  Wallis, W. D.         L.-Cpl.      12423
      3  Walsh, P.             L.-Sergt.    19488
      1  Walters, H. S.        Guardsman    25277
      2  Walton, B.            Sergeant     14892  Killed in action.
      2  Ward, H.              L.-Sergt.    13789  Killed in action.
      2  Ward, R. G.           L.-Cpl.      13559  Killed in action.
      2  Ward, W.              Sergeant     14371
      2  Warner, F.            Guardsman    14007
      2  Warrender, W.         L.-Sergt.    17882
      4  Waterworth, T.        Guardsman    21764
      1  Watkins, R. J.        L.-Sergt.    11158  Missing.
      3  Watts, A. S.          Sergeant     13353
      4  Watts, H.             Corporal     23206
      2  Webb, F. J.           Sergeant     12635
      3  Wentworth, W. H.      Sergeant     15491  Died of wounds.
      3  Westmoreland, M.      A. L.-Cpl.   20178  Killed in action.
      1  Wharmby, H.           Sergeant     14353
      1  Wheadon, F. J.        Guardsman    18932  Discharged.
      1  Whetton, G.           Guardsman    16858
      2  Whiteside, G. S.      L.-Sergt.    23788
      2  Wilding, H. T.        Guardsman    15564
      3  Wilkinson, W. E.      Guardsman    15356  To Army Res.
      4  Williams, A. H.       Sergeant     18904
      3  Williams, H.          Sergeant      9426  Killed in action.
      4  Williams, H. S.       Sergeant     14355
      2  Williams, W.          Guardsman    14356  To M.F.P.
      1  Willmott, A. E.       A. L.-Sergt. 30004
      1  Wilson, A.            Guardsman    24261
      1  Wilson, A.            Corporal     18100
      1  Wilson, C. A.         Guardsman    15333
      2  Wilson, G. H.         Guardsman    14195
      3  Wilson, S. T.         L.-Cpl.      24491
      3  Wood, A.              Guardsman    19963
      1  Wood, J. A.           L.-Sergt.    19041  Died of wounds.
      1  Wood, L.              Guardsman    13097
         Woodhead, T.          Guardsman    27861
      1  Wooldridge, D.        Guardsman    11998
      1  Worton, H.            Sergeant     12498
      2  Wright, B.            L.-Sergt.    15113
      3  Wright, J.            Guardsman    14675


                             BAR TO "M.M."

      4  Askey, J.             Guardsman    21851
      2  Bailey, G.            Guardsman    21214
      1  Bagot, J., M.M.       Guardsman    26689
      2  Baker, W. H.          C.Q.M.S.     14809
      2  Bryant, W. T. H.      L.-Cpl.      16400
      3  Burke, W.             Sergeant     16530
      2  Coton, A.             Guardsman    21392
      1  Crick, F.             Guardsman    14818
      1  Driver, G.            Sergeant     15696
      3  Greenwood, C.         Sergeant     11579  To Commission.
      1  Halls, J.             Guardsman    18001
      1  Jackson, A.           A. L.-Sergt. 18516
      2  Jeanes, F.            Sergeant     12813
      3  Jeffreys, C. J.       A. L.-Cpl.   12111
      3  Keggin, W.            A. L.-Cpl.   28533
      4  Lowe, J.              Guardsman    24699
      2  Lucas, T. H. W.       A. L.-Cpl.    8942
      2  Nottage, T.S.         Sergeant     22065
      3  Robertson, A. H.      L.-Sergt.    24770 To Labour Corps.
      2  Smith, J. H. W.       Guardsman    22934
      3  Spouge, W.            L.-Cpl.      16650
      1  Spur, J. W.           Guardsman    26394
      3  Voce, J.              Guardsman    16539
      3  Webb, F. J.           Sergeant     12635
      2  Warner, F.            Guardsman    14007
      1  Wharmby, H.           Sergeant     14353
      2  Wilding, H. T.        Guardsman    15564


                      "MERITORIOUS SERVICE MEDAL"

          (FOR VALUABLE AND MERITORIOUS SERVICE IN THE FIELD)

      2  Abbott, H.            Sergeant      6622
         Aldridge, H. N.       O.R.C.S.      7055
      1  Allitt, H.            C.Q.M.S.     14870
      1  Barker, C.            Sergeant      9718
      2  Beard, R.             C.S.M.       12909
      1  Birch, A.             C.S.M.        6498
      3  Boyles, F.            A.S.M.        9259  Att. 4th Army
                                                    Inf. School.
      1  Brett, A. E.          Guardsman    12392
      3  Brown, F. A.          Sergeant     18729
      4  Burch, A. E.          C.S.M.       11033
      3  Burgess, T. C.        Corporal     17294
      1  Burrows, R.           Sergeant     10153
      4  Burrows, F.           Sergeant     11594
      2  Capper, J. L.         S.M.          7094
      3  Card, R.              C.Q.M.S.      7736
      2  Cartwright, G.        A.Q.M.S.     11889
         Cooke, H.             Q.M.S.       10738
      1  Croucher, R.          R.S.M.       11034
      2  Davis, A.             A. Sergt.    12525
      3  Fawcett, W.           Q.M.S.        9058
      3  Fox, W.               Guardsman    12162
      2  Francombe, O. C.      A.S.M.        6338
      3  Freeman, A.           C.Q.M.S.     16761
         French, F.            C.Q.M.S.     11989
         Gardiner, A. R.       C.Q.M.S.     13368
      2  Grahame, J. H.        L.-Sergt.    12451  To Commission.
      3  Hawkins, W. E.        A.D.S.       14207
         Hill, R. H.           C.Q.M.S.     21435
         Howell, H. G.         Q.M.S.        4866
      4  Hutchings, W.         C.S.M.        7589
      2  Kerry, D.             Sergeant     15258
         Latter, H. E.         C.Q.M.S.      8094
      3  Loftus, T. D.         Sergeant     13548
      1  McDonald, V. H.       L.-Sergt.    10787
      4  Machin, H.            O.R.C.       20691
      3  Maynard, W. H.        C.S.M.       11253
      2  Moran, W.             Sergeant     19253
         Nash, R. E.           Corporal     15985  To R.E.
      3  Noon, W.              O.R.C.       13387
      2  Oakley, T.            D.S.          7685
      2  Palmer, E.            Sergeant     11868
      3  Peters, G.            C.Q.M.S.     14701
      1  Phillips, C.          S.M.         12425
      2  Powell, J. C., M.M.   C.S.M.       15543
      2  Pownall, L.           Sergeant     15143
      2  Raynor, E. N.         Guardsman    16130
      4  Richmond, F.          Q.M.S.       11806
      1  Round, W. J.          Sergeant     14252
         Ruff, R. J.           Sergeant      8837
      2  Sayer, H. W.          Guardsman    22839
      1  Seckington, C.        Sergeant     14245
         Shelton, J.           C.S.M.       12132  A.R.S.M. Br.
                                                    Salonika Force.
      1  Sims, H.              Guardsman    13232
         Smart, F. T.          A.Q.M.S.     10432
      2  Smith, A.             Sergeant     18611
      2  Thomas, H. J.         Sergeant      6268
      1  Trotter, G.           C.S.M.        9172
      3  Trotter, H.           C.Q.M.S.     10421
      3  Waspe, A.             Sergeant     16648
      3  West, A.              C.S.M.        8980
      3  Westbrook, A.         C.S.M.        6087
      3  Wombwell, R.          Sergt. Dmr.   5027


                  "ROYAL ALBERT MEDAL" (SECOND CLASS)

         Meredith, W. H.       L.-Cpl.      15441
         Warwick, P.           A. L.-Sergt. 18905


                "ROYAL VICTORIAN MEDAL" (SECOND CLASS)

      1  Clayton, C. H.        A.C.Q.M.S.    9809




                             APPENDIX VIII

                       "MENTIONED IN DESPATCHES"


                               OFFICERS

    Acraman, W. E., Major and Quartermaster, M.C., D.C.M. (Twice.)
    Anderton, W. A. A. G. S., Lieut.-Col.
    Ardee, Lord R. le N., Colonel (Temp. Brig.-Gen.), C.B.
    Asquith, R., Lieut. (Killed in action.)
    Aubrey-Fletcher, H. L., Capt. (Bt.-Major), M.V.O., D.S.O. (Four
      times.)
    Bagot, Hon. W. L., Major.
    Bailey, Hon. W. R., Capt. (Actg. Major), Temp. Lieut.-Col., D.S.O.
      (Four times.)
    Barrington-Kennett, B. H., Capt. (Bt.-Major). (Killed in action.)
    Beaumont-Nesbitt, F. G., Capt. (Three times.)
    Bedford, Duke of, Colonel, K.G.
    Benson, C. E., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.), D.S.O.
    Bigham, Hon. C. C., Lieut.-Col., C.M.G.
    Bonham-Carter, F. G., Lieut. (Temp. Capt.).
    Briscoe, R. G., Lieut., M.C.
    Browning, F. A. M., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.), D.S.O.
    Cameron of Lochiel, D. W., Lieut.-Col., C.M.G., Cameron Highlanders.
    Campbell, K. A., Lieut., D.S.O.
    Carisbrooke, Marquis of, Capt., G.C.V.O. (Twice.)
    Carrington, C. W., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.), D.S.O.
    Cavan, Earl of, Lieut.-Gen., K.P., G.C.M.G., K.C.B., M.V.O. (Ten
      times.)
    Cavendish, Hon. W. E., Temp. Brig.-Gen., M.V.O.
    Cavendish, R. H. V., Capt., M.V.O.
    Cecil, Lord E. H., Major, Bt.-Col., K.C.M.G., D.S.O. (Egypt).
      (Twice.) (Died.)
    Cecil, Hon. W. A., Capt., M.C. (Killed in action.)
    Cheylesmore, Lord, Major-Gen., K.C.M.G., K.C.V.O. (Twice.)
    Clive, G. S., Lieut.-Col. (Bt.-Col.), C.B., D.S.O. (Six times.)
    Clive, H. A., Lieut., M.C. (Twice.)
    Clive, P. A., Capt. (Temp. Lieut.-Col.). (Killed in action.)
    Colby, L. R. V., Major. (Killed in action.)
    Colston, Hon. E. M., Major, Bt.-Lieut.-Col. (Temp. Brig.-Gen.),
      C.M.G., D.S.O., M.V.O. (Six times.)
    Combe, T. A., Lieut.
    Congleton, H. B. F., Lord. (Killed in action.)
    Cooper, A. D., 2nd Lieut., D.S.O.
    Cooper, R. J., Brig.-Gen., C.B., C.V.O.
    Corkran, C. E., Bt.-Col. (Temp. Brig.-Gen.), C.M.G. (Six times.)
    Cornforth, J. C., Lieut., M.C.
    Corry, A. V. L., Lieut., M.C. (Killed in action.)
    Craig, D., Lieut., D.S.O.
    Craigie, J. C., Lieut., M.C. (Actg. Capt.).
    Crawley, A. P., Colonel.
    Crespigny, C. R. C. de, Lieut.-Col., C.M.G., D.S.O. (Five times.)
    Cunninghame, A. K. S., Lieut. (Temp. Capt.). (Killed in action.)
    Dalmeny, A. E. H. M. A., Lord, Lieut. (Temp. Lieut.-Col.), D.S.O.,
      M.C. (Four times.)
    Darby, M. A. A., Lieut. (Killed in action.)
    Davies, Sir F. J., Lieut.-Gen., K.C.B., K.C.M.G. (Seven times.)
    Diggle, W. H., Capt. (Temp. Lieut.-Col.), D.S.O., M.C. (Five times.)
    Douglas-Pennant, Hon. G. H., Capt. (Killed in action.)
    Drury-Lowe, W. D., Capt., D.S.O. (Killed in action.) (Twice.)
    Duberly, E. H. J., Lieut., M.C.
    Duberly, G. W., Major. (Killed in action.)
    Duquenoy, M., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Earle, M., Colonel, C.M.G., D.S.O. (Twice.)
    Eaton, Hon. F. O. H., Lieut., D.S.O.
    Ellice, E. C., Capt., D.S.O. (Three times.)
    Fergusson, Sir C., Lieut.-Gen., K.C.B., K.C.M.G., M.V.O., D.S.O.
      (Six times.)
    Fisher-Rowe, C. V., Capt. (Bt.-Major), M.C. (Three times.)
    Fisher-Rowe, L. R., Lieut.-Col. (Died of wounds.)
    Fitzgerald, E. G. A., Lieut. (Temp. Capt.), D.S.O. (Twice.)
    Fox-Pitt, W. A. L., Major (Temp. Lieut.-Col.).
    Garton, W. G. A., Quartermaster, Hon. Lieut.-Col.
    Gascoigne, E. F. O., Hon. Brig.-Gen., C.M.G., D.S.O. (Four times.)
    Gathorne-Hardy, Hon. J. F., Lieut.-Col. (Bt.-Col.), C.B., C.M.G.,
      D.S.O. (Nine times.)
    Gerard, C. R., Capt., D.S.O. (Twice.)
    Glanusk, J. H. R., Lord, Colonel, C.B., C.B.E., D.S.O. (Three
      times.)
    Gleichen, Lord E., Major-Gen., K.C.V.O., C.B., C.M.G., D.S.O.,
      p.s.c. (Twice.)
    Glyn, A. St. L., Major. (Twice.)
    Gordon-Gilmour, R. G., Colonel (Hon. Brig.-Gen.), C.B., C.V.O.,
      D.S.O. (Twice.)
    Gordon-Lennox, Lord B. C., Major. (Killed in action.)
    V.C. Gort, Viscount, Bt.-Major, D.S.O., M.V.O., M.C. (Eight times.)
    Gosselin, A. B. R. R., Capt., D.S.O. (Died of wounds.)
    Greenwood, J. E., Lieut.
    Gregson, L. M., Major, O.B.E.
    Greville, C. H., Capt. (Actg. Major), D.S.O. (Three times.)
    Grey, R., Capt., D.S.O.
    Grigg, E. W. M., Lieut. (Temp. Lieut.-Col.), C.M.G., D.S.O., M.C.
      (Twice.)
    Gunnis, G. G., Lieut. (Temp. Capt.), M.C. (Died of wounds.)
    Hague, C. N., Lieut., M.C.
    Hall, C. A., Lieut., M.C.
    Hamilton, Lord C. N., Capt., D.S.O., M.V.O.
    Hamilton, G. C., Lieut-Col., C.M.G., D.S.O. (Three times.)
    Harcourt-Vernon, G. C. FitzH., Major, D.S.O., M.C.
    Harrison, C. E., Col., C.V.O, C.M.G., M.B., F.R.C.S. (Twice.)
    Heneage, E., Lieut.
    Heneage, G. C. W., Major, D.S.O. (Four times.)
    Hermon-Hodge, Hon. R. H., Major, D.S.O. (Twice.)
    Hervey-Bathurst, Sir F. E. W., Bart., Major, D.S.O. (Three times.)
    Hobart, C. V. C., Lieut.-Col., C.B.E., D.S.O. (Twice.)
    Holbech, L., Lieut., D.S.O., M.C.
    Hood, Viscount, Lieut.-Col., O.B.E. (Twice.)
    Hope, G. E., Capt. (Actg. Lieut.-Col.), M.C. (Presumed killed.)
      (Three times.)
    Hopley, F. J. V. B., Lieut., D.S.O.
    Hughes, J. S., Capt., M.C.
    Ingleby, I. H., Actg. Capt. (Twice.)
    Jeffreys, G. D., Lieut.-Col., Bt.-Col. (Temp. Major-Gen.), C.B.,
      C.M.G. (Seven times.)
    Joicey-Cecil, Lord J. P., Capt. (Temp. Lieut.-Col., R. Defence
      Corps).
    Kerry, Earl of, Lieut.-Col., M.V.O., D.S.O., Irish Guards.
    King, D. L., Lieut.
    Kingsmill, A. de P., Lieut.-Col., D.S.O., M.C.
    Kinloch, Sir D. A., Bart., Brig.-Gen., C.B., M.V.O. (Twice.)
    Knatchbull-Hugessen, M., Lieut., M.C. (Killed in action.) (Twice.)
    Lambert, R., Capt., M.C.
    Lamont, G. S., 2nd Lieut., D.S.O.
    Lascelles, Viscount, Temp. Lieut.-Col., D.S.O. (Twice.)
    Leatham, R. E. K., Major, Bt.-Lieut.-Col., D.S.O. (Twice.)
    Legh, Hon. P. W., Capt., O.B.E.
    Leslie, Sir J., Bart., Col., R. Innis. Fusiliers.
    Lessing, E. A., Lieut., O.B.E.
    Lloyd, Sir F., Lieut.-Gen., G.C.V.O., K.C.B., D.S.O.
    Lloyd, A. H. O., Lieut.-Col. (Temp. Brig.-Gen.), C.M.G., M.V.O.,
      Shropshire Yeomanry. (Three times.)
    Lloyd, J. A., Lieut.
    Loch, E. D., Lord, Major-Gen., C.B., C.M.G., M.V.O., D.S.O. (Five
      times.)
    Lygon, Hon. R., Lieut.-Col., M.V.O., M.C.
    Lyttelton, O., Lieut. (Temp. Capt.), D.S.O., M.C. (Twice.)
    Maitland, M. E. M. C., Major (Temp. Lieut.-Col.), D.S.O. (Five
      times.)
    Martin, F., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.).
    Minchin, T. W., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.), D.S.O.
    Mitchell, C., Capt. (Temp. Major), D.S.O., O.B.E. (Four times.)
    Morley, Hon. C. Hope, Lieut.
    Morrison, J. A., Major, D.S.O. (Twice.)
    Murray-Threipland, W., Lieut.-Col. (Temp. Col.), D.S.O. (Three
      times.)
    Nicol, W. E., Major, D.S.O. (Killed in action.)
    Northumberland, A. I., Duke of, Major (Temp. Lieut.-Col.)., C.B.E.
    Pakenham, H. A., Lieut.-Col., C.B., C.M.G., R. Irish Rifles. (Three
      times.)
    Parker, Hon. M. B., Capt. (Five times.)
    Pelly, P. V., Lieut.
    Penn, A. H., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.), M.C.
    Penn, E. F., Lieut. (Capt.).
    Percy, Lord W. R., Capt. (Temp. Col.), D.S.O. (Twice.)
    Pereira, G. E., Bt.-Col. (Temp. Brig.-Gen.), C.B., C.M.G., D.S.O.
      (Six times.)
    Pike, E. J. L., Major (Bt.-Lieut.-Col.), M.C. (Three times.)
    Pilcher, W. S., Capt., Bt.-Major, D.S.O. (Three times.)
    Poltimore, G. W. W., Lord, Capt., R. North Devon Yeomanry. (Twice.)
    Ponsonby, Rt. Hon. Sir F. E. G., Bt.-Lieut.-Col., K.C.B., K.C.V.O.
    Powell, E. G. H., Major (Actg. Lieut.-Col.), London Regiment. (Twice.)
    Powney, C. du P. P., Lieut.-Col.
    V.C. Pryce, T. T., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.), M.C. (Missing.)
    Quilter, J. A. C., Major (Temp. Lieut.-Col.) (Killed in action.)
    Rasch, G. E. C., Capt., Bt.-Major, D.S.O. (Three times.)
    Rhodes, A. T. G., Capt. (Twice.)
    Ridley, E. D., Capt., M.C.
    Ritchie, A. T. A., Lieut., M.C.
    Rolinson, J. C., Major and Quartermaster, D.C.M.
    Ruggles-Brise, Sir H. G., Major-Gen., K.C.M.G., C.B., M.V.O. (Five
      times.)
    Russell, Hon. A. V. F., Major (Temp. Brig.-Gen.), C.M.G., M.V.O.
      (Six times.)
    Russell, G. B. A., Capt. (Temp. Major).
    St. Levan, J. T., Lord, Hon. Brig.-Gen., C.V.O., C.B.
    Saltoun, Lord, Lieut.-Col., C.M.G.
    Sandeman, H. G. W., Lieut.
    Scott, Lord F. G. M. D., Major, Bt.-Lieut.-Col., D.S.O.
    Scott-Kerr, R., Col., C.B., M.V.O., D.S.O. (Twice.)
    Sergison-Brooke, B. N., Lieut.-Col., C.M.G., D.S.O. (Seven times.)
    Seymour, E., Major, D.S.O., M.V.O., O.B.E. (Four times.)
    Seymour, Lord H. C., Major (Bt.-Lieut.-Col.), D.S.O. (Five times.)
    Sheppard, E., Capt., D.S.O., M.C. (Three times.)
    Smith, D. A., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.), M.C.
    Smith, W. R. A., Lieut.-Col, C.M.G. (Twice.) (Killed in action.)
    Spencer-Churchill, E. G., Capt., M.C.
    Stanhope, Earl, Major (Temp. Lieut.-Col.), D.S.O., M.C. (Twice.)
    Stanley, Hon. F. C., Bt.-Lieut.-Col. (Temp. Brig.-Gen.), C.M.G.,
      D.S.O. (Five times.)
    Stein, O. F., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.), D.S.O.
    Streatfeild, Sir H., Colonel, K.C.V.O., C.B., C.M.G. (Twice.)
    Streatfeild, H. S. J., Lieut.-Col, D.S.O., London Regiment. (Twice.)
    Stucley, H. St. L., Major. (Killed in action.)
    Swaine, F. L. V., Capt. (Temp. Major).
    Swift, C. T., Lieut. (Actg. Capt.). (Twice.)
    Symons, T. E. R., Capt. (Bt.-Major).
    Teece, J., Major and Quartermaster, M.C. (Three times.)
    Thorne, A. F. A. N., Major (Actg. Lieut.-Col), C.M.G., D.S.O.
      (Seven times.)
    Trench, R. P. le P., Capt., M.C.
    Trotter, E. H., Lieut.-Col., D.S.O.
    Trotter, G. F., Bt.-Lieut.-Col. (Temp. Brig.-Gen.), C.B., C.M.G.,
      C.B.E., M.V.O., D.S.O. (Four times.)
    Tryon, G. C., Bt.-Major, M.P. (Twice.)
    Turner, C. R., Lieut.
    Vaughan, E. N. E. M., Major, D.S.O.
    Vereker, G. G. M., Lieut., M.C.
    Vivian, V., Major (Bt.-Lieut.-Col.), C.M.G., M.V.O., D.S.O. (Seven
      times.)
    Vivian, G. N., Major, O.B.E.
    Wakeman, E. O. R., Lieut. (Killed in action.)
    Wales, H.R.H. The Prince of, Captain, K.G., G.C.M.G., G.B.E., M.C.
      (Twice.)
    Walker, C. F. A., Capt. (Actg. Major) (Temp. Lieut.-Col.), M.C.
      (Twice.)
    Wall, G. H., Capt. and Quartermaster.
    Warrender, H. V., Lieut.-Col., D.S.O. (Twice.)
    Webster, Sir A. F. W. E., Bart., Capt. (Temp. Major), O.B.E.
    Welby, R. W. G., Lieut. (Killed in action.)
    Weld-Forester, Hon. A. O. W. C., Major, M.V.O. (Died of wounds.)
    Wellesley, Lord G., Capt. (Temp. Lieut.-Col.), M.C., R.A.F.
    Wellesley, Lord R., Capt. (Killed in action.)
    Westmacott, G. R., Capt., D.S.O.
    White, G. D., Major (Bt.-Lieut.-Col.), M.P. (Three times.)
    White, H., Lieut. (Died of wounds.)
    Wiggins, A. F. R., Capt. (Twice.)
    Williams, M., Bt.-Major (Actg. Lieut.-Col.).
    Williams-Bulkely, R. G. W., Major, M.C. (Deceased.)
    Windram, R., Lieut. (Twice.)


                  WARRANT OFFICERS, N.C.O.'S, AND MEN

    Batt.  Name.                Rank.       Regtl. No.   Remarks.

      2  Abbott, H.           Sergeant         6622
      3  Aston, A.            A.D.S.          11641  To M.G. Guards.
         Ashworth, R. H.      Sergeant        20432
      2  Austin, W. T.        Sergeant        11020  To Commission.
      2  Baker, J.            Sergeant        17174
      1  Barker, C.           Sergeant         9718
      2  Beard, R.            D.S.            12909
      3  Beddows, W.  A.      Sergeant        20612
      2  Bennett, A.          C.S.M.          11755
      2  Birch, A.            C.S.M.           6498
      2  Blackwell, J. H.     C.S.M.          11300
      4  Blyth, T. J.         C.Q.M.S.        13511
         Boots, H. S.         Q.M.S.           8230
      3  Boyles, F.           A. Sergt.-Maj.   9259  A.S.M., 4th
                                                      Army School.
      2  Bradley, J. H.       Sergeant        13152
         Bright, A. E.        A.R.S.M.         4543
      3  Brown, A. A.         Sergeant        20758
         Brown, F. A.         Sergeant        18729
         Brown, C. E.         C.S.M.           8652
      1  Bryant, J.           D.S.            10772
      3  Bryan, W. K.         A. Sergeant     13494
      2  Capper, J. L.        R.S.M.           7094
      1  Carpenter, S. J.     L.-Cpl.         12822
      1  Champion, T. K.      Guardsman       12324
      2  Chapman, W. A.       Guardsman       16431  Killed in action.
      1  Chesterman, G. H.    L.-Cpl.         15360
      3  Cook, A. H.          L.-Sergt.       19467  Killed in action.
      2  Cooke, H.            Q.M.S.          10738
      4  Copping, H.          A.D.S.           9043  To Essex Regt.
      3  Cronin, D.           Guardsman       11492  Discharged.
      2  Curtis, E. E.        Sergeant        16707  Missing.
      4  Day, E. W.           C.S.M.          11086
         Day, E.              Sergeant        18953
      3  Dickson, R.          Sergeant        11900
         Dobson, W. H.        C.S.M.          13610  To M.G. Guards.
      3  Fawcett, W.          S.C.             9058
         Fellows, W. J.       Guardsman       19083
      2  Fincham, J.  A.      L.-Sergt.       16318
      4  Francis, R. W.       Sergeant        12241
      2  Francis, T. W.       L.-Cpl.         11327  Killed in action.
      3  Freeman, A.          Sergeant        16761
      5  Freeman, J. P.       C.S.M.           5984
      4  Fremlin, E. J.       A.D.S.          12675
      5  French, F.           A.R.S.M.        11989
      4  Frogley, W. D.       Guardsman       17735
      1  Gibson, H. W.        Guardsman       17784
         Godfrey, F.          A.S.M.           5623  To Commission.
      2  Godfrey, W. E.       Guardsman       12347
      1  Golding, A. J.       Sergeant        12118  To M.F.P.
      1  Golding, W. C.       A.C.Q.M.S.      14711  4th Army Sig.
                                                      School.
         Grahame, J. H.       L.-Sergt.       12451  To Commission.
      2  Gudgin, R.           C.S.M.           9855
         Hales, P. J.         A. Sergt.       16379
      4  Hartley, M.          A. Sergt.       20768
      2  Hawkins, W. E.       A.D.S.          14207
      3  Hill, A. M.          S.M.             5163
         Howell, H. G.        Q.M.S.           4866
      1  Hughes, W.           S.M.            11487  (Three times.)
      2  Jacques, W. E.       Sergeant        14727  To Army Cyclist
                                                      Corps.
      1  John, B.             L.-Sergt.       17719  Discharged.
      1  Jones, C.            C.S.M.          10107  To A.G. Staff.
      2  Jones, D. J.         Guardsman       10475  Discharged.
         Jones, E.            A.R.S.M.         5491
      2  Jones, F. L. C.      L.-Cpl.         16167  To Commission.
      2  Knight, R. J.        Guardsman       14991
      1  Lambourne, W. J.     Guardsman       12204  Killed in action.
      1  Laming, G. W.        Sergeant        14248
      1  Langley, W. J.       C.Q.M.S.        14620  Killed.
      3  Latta, W.            L.-Cpl.         11372  Died of wounds.
      4  Livick, H. J.        Sergeant         8178
      2  Ludlow, E.           S.M.             4947  To Commission.
                                                      Killed during Air
                                                      Raid on London.
      4  Littler, J.          S.M.             8380
         Littlewood, R.       Sergeant        10963
      3  Loftus, J.           Sergeant        13548
      1  Lund, H.             L.-Cpl.         14894  Discharged.
      2  McDonald, P.         L.-Cpl.         16202  To Welsh Gds.
      4  Marriott, C., M.M.   C.S.M.          13729
    R.S. Martin, F.         S.C.             5749  To Commission.
      3  Matthews, W.         L.-Sergt.       12430  Died of wounds.
      1  Miller, W.           A. Sergt.       13872
      3  Munn, A.             L.-Cpl.         21384
      2  Munns, F. J.         Sergeant        10394  Killed in action.
      2  Murphy, P.           Guardsman       12434  To R.E.
      1  Nash, R. E.          Corporal        15985  To R.E.
      2  Nelmes, E.           Guardsman       14296  Hdqrs. 1st Gds.
                                                      Bde.
         Newcomb, G.          C.S.M.           6966
      3  Noon, W.             Sergeant        13387
      3  North, G. E.         L.-Cpl.          9440
      2  Norton, J.           A.D.S.          10330
      3  Nuttall, H.          L.-Sergt.       11091  Killed in action.
      2  Oakley, F.           D. Sergt.        7685
      4  Painter, H.          L.-Cpl.         14498  Died of wounds.
      2  Paradine, H.         Sergeant        15209  Discharged.
      1  Parkin, J. E.        S.M.             5572  To Commission.
      3  Parris, F. T.        L.-Sergt.       13567
      2  Parry, W.            C.S.M.          10453  Discharged.
      2  Parsons, F.          Corporal        16272  Died of wounds.
         Payne, F. J.         A.S.M.          12096  To London Regt.
      1  Percival, W.         C.S.M.          11591
      4  Pettitt, T.          C.S.M.          10699
      1  Phillips, C.         Q.M.S.          12425
                              (O.R.S.)
      1  Powell, J. C.        C.Q.M.S.        15543
      2  Rhodes, G.           Guardsman       16989  Killed in action.
      5  Richmond, F.         Q.M.S.          11806
      1  Roache, G.           Guardsman       18503  Killed in action.
      2  Robinson, C. A.      A. Sergt.       13980
      4  Robinson, J. W.      L.-Cpl.         20219
      1  Rowe, E. J.          C.Q.M.S.        14068
      2  Rule, C.             Guardsman       14224  To M.G. Guards.
      2  Sapsford, W. A.      L.-Cpl.         14033  Killed in action.
         Scriven, A.          A.L.C.           8775
      3  Smith, A. E.         C.Q.M.S.        12597
      1  Smith, J.            Sergeant        14785  Died of wounds.
      2  Smith, P.            Guardsman       13473  Died.
      2  Smith, P. H.         L.-Cpl.         13039  Hdqrs. 14th C.
      1  Spencer, J.          Corporal        15132
      3  Stanton, E.          L.-Cpl.         19505  Discharged.
      4  Stapleton, O.        Sergeant        13527
      1  Strickland, W.       Guardsman        9877
      2  Thomas, J.           Sergeant        14801
      4  Turner, A.           L.-Cpl.         21622
      3  Underwood, W. C.     O.R.C.S.        15639
      4  Vaughan, A.          L.-Cpl.         17144
      2  Walker, A. E.        Guardsman       14418
      5  Walmsley, J.         A.Q.M.S.         8685  Empl. War O.
      3  Walsh, W.            L.-Sergt.       19214
      4  Warwick, P.          A. L.-Sergt.    18905
      1  Waterman, W. J.      Guardsman       18177  Died of wounds.
         Way, W.              L.-Cpl.         14133
      1  West, W.             C.S.M.           8980
         Whiteman, H.         A. L.-Sergt.    18466
      2  Whitney, G. F.       L.-Cpl.         14347
      4  Wilkinson, A. B.     Guardsman       19844
      4  Williams, H. S.      Sergeant        14355
         Woodiss, F. G.       Guardsman       22686
      3  Wyeth, W. H.         A. Sergt.       21683




                              APPENDIX IX

                    GUARDS DIVISION--"CERTIFICATES
                            FOR GALLANTRY"


    Batt.   Name.               Rank.     Regtl. No.  Remarks.

      1  Abbott, H.           Sergeant         6622
      3  Ashworth, R. H.      L.-Cpl.         20432
      3  Aston, A.            A.D.S.          11641  To M.G. Guards.
         Austin, O. K.        Guardsman       15190
      1  Barker, C.           Sergeant         9718
      4  Barker, S. L.        L.-Cpl.         18708  To R.E.
      2  Bennett, A.          C.S.M.          11755
      2  Birch, A.            C.S.M.           6498
         Blyth, T. J.         C.Q.M.S.        13511
      1  Boyles, E.           C.Q.M.S.        14220  Discharged.
         Bradley, J. H.       Sergeant        13152
      1  Brown, F. A.         Sergeant        18729  Hdqrs. 2nd Gds.
                                                      Bde.
      1  Brown, T. W.         Q.M.S.           8277
      1  Bryant, J.           D.S.            10772
      1  Carpenter, S.        L.-Cpl.         12822
      2  Chapman, D. W.       A.C.Q.M.S.       8711
      2  Clarke, W. H.        L.-Cpl.         14472  Discharged.
      2  Colgate, R. E.       Sergeant        14914  To Commission.
      3  Cooke, G.            Guardsman       16644  Killed in action.
      3  Coonan, T.           Guardsman       18123  To M.G. Guards.
      2  Cox, J.              L.-Cpl.         13475
      3  Cronin, D.           Guardsman       11492  Discharged.
      1  Day, E. W.           A.D.S.          11086  (Twice.)
      4  Dean, F. J.          L.-Cpl.         17187  Killed in action.
      4  Dickens, T. G.       Corporal        23763  Acc. killed.
      3  Dickson, R.          Sergeant        11900
         Dobson, H.           C.S.M.          13610  To M.G. Guards.
      4  Fellows, W. J.       Guardsman       19083
      4  Finch, W. H.         A. Sergt.       19017
      2  Godfrey, W. E.       Guardsman       12347 1st Gds. Bde., to
                                                     M.G. Guards.
      3  Gould, C.            Sergeant        11197
      4  Hall, H.             Sergeant        21589
      4  Hartley, M.          A. Sergt.       20768
      3  Hawkins, W. E.       A.D.S.          14207
      4  Heap, J.             Guardsman       20183  To Labour Corps.
      4  Higgins, H.          Corporal        21525  Killed in action.
      4  Holland, A.          L.-Sergt.       21945  Discharged.
      1  Hughes, W.           S.M.            11487
      3  Kent, W. J.          L.-Sergt.       19019
      3  Keyte, J. G.         L.-Sergt.       14639
      2  Kirkham, C.          L.-Cpl.         14744
      3  Latta, W.            L.-Cpl.         11372
      4  Littler, J.          S.M.             8380
      4  Livock, H.           Sergeant         8178
      3  Loftus, T. D.        Sergeant        13548
      4  Marriott, C. K.      C.S.M.          13729
      4  Matthews, W. C.      Corporal        12430  Died of wounds.
      2  McCune, A.           Sergeant        12819
      1  McGinn, T.           Guardsman       15013  Died of wounds.
      4  Miller, W.           A. Sergt.       13872
      2  Nelmes, E.           Guardsman       14296
      3  Nuttall, H.          Corporal        11091  Killed in action.
      4  Painter, H.          Corporal        14498  Died of wounds.
      2  Percival, G.         C.S.M.           9950  Died.
      4  Pettitt, T.          C.S.M.          10699
      4  Powlesland, J.       Guardsman       21563
      3  Purdy, T.            Sergeant        12987
      2  Robinson, C. A.      A. Sergt.       13980
      4  Robinson, J. W.      L.-Cpl.         20219
      1  Rossiter, E. J.      L.-Cpl.         18661  To R.E.
      1  Rowe, E. J.          C.Q.M.S.        14068
      4  Rowlett, J.          Sergeant        19211  Att. No. 4 O.C.
                                                      Batt.
         Ryall, H. E.         L.-Cpl.         16116  3rd Bde. Gds.
                                                      M.G. Coy.
                                                      Killed in action.
      2  Scott, J.            Guardsman       15411
      3  Smith, A. E.         C.Q.M.S.        12597
      2  Smith, P.            Guardsman       13473  Died of wounds.
      2  Snooke, F.           C.S.M.           9797  To Commission.
         Speller, F.          D.S.             9686  2nd Gds. Bde.
                                                      M.G. Coy., to
                                                      M.G. Gds.
      4  Steele, J. A.        Guardsman       20464  To G.M.G.R.
      2  Stevens, A.          Sergeant        13751
      2  Thomas, H. J.        Sergeant         6268
      1  Thomas, W. J.        C.Q.M.S.        13716  Killed in action.
         Vaughan, A.          L.-Cpl.         17144
      1  Wheadon, G.          Guardsman       18932  Discharged.
      2  Williams, H.         Guardsman       16223
         Williams, W.         Guardsman       14356
      2  Wood, H. W.          S.M.             5225  To Commission.




                              APPENDIX X

  WARRANT OFFICERS, NON-COMMISSIONED OFFICERS, AND MEN WHO HAVE BEEN
  PROMOTED TO COMMISSIONED RANK SINCE THE COMMENCEMENT OF HOSTILITIES


    -------+------+---------------------------+--------------+-------------------
     Bat-  |Regtl.|   Rank and Name.          |   Regiment.  |Awards, Promotions,
    talion.|  No. |                           |              |  etc.
    -------+------+---------+-----------------+--------------+-------------------
       R.S.| 11295|Q.M.S.   |Arnold, W. W.    |Northumberland|Lieut., Actg. Capt.
           |      |         |                 |  Fusiliers   |
         3 |  5360|Sergt.   |Ball, J.         |Duke of       |Capt., M.C. (Died.)
           |      |         |                 |  Cornwall's  |
           |      |         |                 |  L.I.        |
         3 |  6432|D. Sergt.|Pennington, S.   |Royal Warwicks|Temp. Capt.
           |      |         |                 |              | (Killed in action.)
         3 | 10815|C.Q.M.S. |Ricketts, A.     |Machine Gun   |Lieut., Temp. Capt.
           |      |         |                 |  Corps       | (Relinq. Commission,
           |      |         |                 |              | ill-health.)
         3 |  7660|C.Q.M.S. |Hassall, A.      |Norfolk       |Actg. Major.
           |      |         |                 |  Regiment    |
         D.|  4703|C.S.I.M. |Gache, R.        |Royal Irish   |Capt.
           |      |         |                 |  Regiment    |
         3 | 11123|C.Q.M.S. |Booth, T.        |Connaught     |Capt., M.C.
           |      |         |                 |  Rangers     |
         4 |  9636|C.Q.M.S. |Luckett, J. S.   |Royal Irish   |Died.
           |      |         |                 |  Regiment    |
         4 | 13183|Sergt.   |Hayes, J. P.     |Royal Irish   |Lieut., Temp.
           |      |         |                 |  Fusiliers   | Capt.
         4 | 14705|Sergt.   |Schroder, F. T.  |Suffolk       |Killed in action.
           |      |         |                 |  Regiment    |
         2 |  9089|C.S.M.   |O'Connor, E. R.  |R. Munster    |Capt., Temp.
           |      |         |                 |  Fusiliers   |  Lieut.-Col.
           |      |         |                 |              | (Croix de Guerre).
     W.A.R.|  8925|C.Q.M.S. |Andrew, F. A.    |East Yorks    |(Killed in action.)
           |      |         |                 |  Regiment    |
         2 | 10974|Sergt.   |Holness, H. H. J.|Manchester    |Lieut., Actg.
           |      |         |                 |  Regiment    | Capt., D.C.M.
         3 |  2705|S.M.     |Wall, G. H.      |Grenadier     |Capt. and Qrmr., M.C.
           |      |         |                 |  Guards      |
       R.S.|  3486|S. Clerk |Dabell, W. B.    |Welsh Guards  |Capt. and Qrmr., M.C.
       R.S.|  6534|Q.M.S.   |Holland, A. N.   |East Lancs    |Lieut.
           |      |         |                 |  Regiment    |
         1 |  6546|Q.M.S.   |White, H. P.     |Cheshire      |Lieut., M.C.
           |      |         |                 |  Regiment    |
         4 | 11060|C.S.M.   |Maywood, J. H.   |Duke of       |(Died.)
           |      |         |                 |  Cornwall's  |
           |      |         |                 |  L.I.        |
       P.S.|  6373|Sergt.   |Watkins, T.      |Royal Berks   |(Killed in action.)
           |      |         |                 |  Regiment    |
         S.| 12988|Sergt.   |Hassell, J.      |K.O.Y.L.I.    |Lieut., D.S.O., M.C.
         2 | 13664|Sergt.   |Rochfort, R. A.  |Royal Warwicks|Capt., D.S.O., M.C.
       R.S.|  7732|Q.M.S.   |Heath, S. J.     |Welsh Regiment|Capt., Temp.
           |      |         |                 |              | Lieut.-Col., M.C.
         5 |  8415|S.M.     |White, G.        |Northumberland|Actg. Major., M.C.
           |      |         |                 |  Fusiliers   |
         5 | 12997|Sergt.   |Bailey, J.       |Northumberland|Temp. Capt.
           |      |         |                 |  Fusiliers   |
         5 | 14502|L.-Sergt.|Hine, E. E.      |East Lancs    |Actg. Capt., M.C.
           |      |         |                 |  Regiment    |
         1 | 16576|Sergt.   |Matson, C.       |Machine Gun   |Actg. Major, M.C.
           |      |         |                 |  Corps       |
       R.S.|  6156|Q.M.S.   |Baker, C. W.     |Leicester     |Temp. Major, M.C.
           |      |         |                 |  Regiment    |
         2 |  4947|S.M.     |Ludlow, E.       |Grenadier     |M.C. (Killed in
           |      |         |                 |  Guards      | London.)
         1 | 17512|Pte.     |Drew, J. B.      |R. W. Surrey  |Lieut.
           |      |         |                 |  Regiment    |
     A.G.S.| 10107|C.S.M.   |Jones, C.        |Northumberland|Actg. Capt. (Relinq.
           |      |         |                 |  Fusiliers   | Commission,
           |      |         |                 |              | ill-health.)
       P.S.|  3825|A.S.M.   |Cooke, F. A.     |London        |Capt. and Qrmr.
           |      |         |                 |  Regiment    |
         1 |  5572|S.M.     |Parkin, J. E.    |R.A.F.        |Lieut.-Col., M.B.E.
         1 | 22485|L.-Cpl.  |Wilson, C. V.    |Royal Berks   |Lieut. (Died from
           |      |         |                 |  Regiment    | wounds.)
         1 | 18454|Guardsman|Jones, A. C.     |Lincoln       |Capt., M.C. (Killed
           |      |         |                 |  Regiment    | in action.)
         1 | 17940|Guardsman|Perry, C.        |Middlesex     |(Killed in action.)
           |      |         |                 |  Regiment    |
         1 | 13127|C.S.M.   |Pritchard, G.    |Wiltshire     |Actg. Capt.
           |      |         |                 |  Regiment    |
         3 | 19393|L.-Cpl.  |Bennison, M.     |Yorks Regiment|(Died.)
         1 |  6702|S.M.     |Young, H.        |K.O. Royal    |Actg. Capt.,
           |      |         |                 |  Lancs       | Adjt., M.C.
     M.G.C.| 13394|Sergt.   |Alexander, R.    |Gds. Machine  |Lieut., M.M.
           |      |         |                 |  Gun Regt.   |
         5 | 24160|L.-Sergt.|Smith, F. A.     |Royal Warwicks|M.C.
           |      |         |                 |  Regiment    |
         3 | 11720|L.-Sergt.|Clayson, S. C.   |Royal Warwicks|
           |      |         |                 |  Regiment    |
       P.S.|  5623|D. Sergt.|Godfrey, F.      |Royal         |Temp. Capt. (Killed
           |      |         |                 |  Fusiliers   | in action.)
       P.S.|  4543|S.M.     |Bright, A. C.    |Royal         |
           |      |         |                 |  Fusiliers   |
         2 | 14914|Sergt.   |Colgate, R. E.   |Gloucester    |(Killed in action.)
           |      |         |                 |  Regiment    |
         3 | 14144|C.S.M.   |Bloomfield, A. H.|Gloucester    |(Killed in action.)
           |      |         |                 |  Regiment    |
         4 | 14755|Sergt.   |Virgo, E. W.     |Gloucester    |Lieut., M.C.
           |      |         |                 |  Regiment    |
         3 | 14274|C.Q.M.S. |Rudge, L. M.     |Worcester     |Temp. Capt. and
           |      |         |                 |  Regiment    | Adjt., M.M.
       S.L.| 11469|Sergt.   |Parks, J. B.     |Essex Regiment|Temp. Major, M.C.
         4 | 14172|C.Q.M.S. |Storer, S.       |Essex Regiment|
         2 |  9797|C.S.M.   |Snook, F.        |N. Staffs     |Actg. Major,
           |      |         |                 |  Regiment    |  M.C.; D.C.M.
     A.G.S.|  5888|S.M.     |Bailey, C.       |General List  |Temp. Major.
         4 | 12688|C.S.M.   |Grellis, J.      |Border        |Lieut., Actg. Capt.,
           |      |         |                 |  Regiment    | M.C.; D.C.M.
         2 | 21398|Guardsman|Reid, G. R.      |East Kent     |(Killed in action.)
           |      |         |                 |  Regiment    |
         1 | 18845|Corpl.   |Turner, G.       |Liverpool     |(Relq. Commn.,
           |      |         |                 |  Regiment    |  ill-health.)
       R.S.|  5749|S. Clerk  |Martin, F.      |Grenadier     |Actg. Capt.
           |      |          |                |  Guards      |
         5 | 15484|Corpl.    |Ford, F. W.     |Welsh Regiment|
         1 | 13125|Corpl.    |Penn, P. R.     |Irish         |Capt.
           |      |          |                |  Fusiliers   |
         5 | 22033|Guardsman |Grice, H. T.    |Scottish      |(Died.)
           |      |          |                |  Rifles      |
         3 | 17946|L.-Cpl.   |Cruickshank,    |R. Innis.     |(Relq. Commission,
           |      |          |  J. A. B.      |  Fusiliers   |  ill-health.)
         5 | 21018|Guardsman |Beech, A. H.    |North Staffs  |Actg. Capt.
           |      |          |                |  Regiment    |
         S.|   215|C. Sergt. |Crook, A.       |General List  |Major and Qrmr.
         3 | 11961|Sergt.    |Morris, C. T.   |Gloucester    |M.C.
           |      |          |                |  Regiment    |
         5 | 10424|Sergt.    |Burry, E. T.    |Wiltshire     |
           |      |          |                |  Regiment    |
         5 | 10862|Sergt.    |Bayley, E. A.   |Liverpool     |Lieut.
           |      |          |                |  Regiment    |
         5 | 11043|Sergt.    |Carter, F. J.   |Yorkshire L.I.|M.M.
         5 | 16167|L.-Cpl.   |Jones, F. L. C. |R. Welsh      |M.M. (Killed
           |      |          |                |  Fusiliers   | in action.)
         5 | 13408|Sergt.    |Willett, N. H.  |Royal         |(Killed in action.)
           |      |          |                |  Fusiliers   |
         3 | 14477|Sergt.    |Noble, T. E.    |Welsh Regiment|M.C., M.M.
         3 | 13399|L.-Cpl.   |Richings, A. W. |South Lancs   |Actg. Capt. and
           |      |          |                |  Regiment    | Adjt., M.C.
         3 | 14235|Sergt.    |Fox. E. C.      |East Lancs    |
           |      |          |                |  Regiment    |
         3 | 15352|Sergt.    |Shaw, I.        |Royal Warwick |
           |      |          |                |  Regiment    |
         3 | 11579|Sergt.    |Greenwood, C.   |Royal Lancs   |M.M. (Killed
           |      |          |                |  Regiment    | in action.)
         2 | 12451|L.-Sergt. |Grahame, J. H.  |K.O. Scottish |
           |      |          |                |  Borderers   |
         5 | 16557|Sergt.    |Wright, L. G.   |Essex Regiment|D.C.M.
         4 | 15651|Sergt.    |Price, W. A. W. |Somerset L.I. |Actg. Capt.
         5 | 14590|A.C.Q.M.S.|Cole, G. F.     |Wilts Regiment|
         2 | 14016|Sergt.    |Hibbard, R.     |K.O.S.L.I.    |
         5 |  5225|S.M.      |Wood, H.        |Grenadier     |Actg. Qrmr., D.C.M.
           |      |          |                |  Guards      |
         1 | 16734|Sergt.    |Halls, F.       |Somerset L.I. |2nd Lieut.
         1 | 15650|Sergt.    |Jones, S.       |Royal West    |D.C.M.
           |      |          |                |  Surrey Regt.|
         3 | 16754|Sergt.    |Morris, A. J.   |Manchester    |
           |      |          |                |  Regiment    |
    -------+------+----------+----------------+--------------+------------------

    R.S.-Regimental Staff. D.-Depots. W.A.R.-West African Regiment.
    P.S.-Permanent Staff. M.G.C.-Machine Gun Company. A.G.S.-Army
    Gymnastic Staff. S.L.-Supernumerary List.

   EX-WARRANT AND NON-COMMISSIONED OFFICERS AND MEN APPOINTED TO
     COMMISSIONS SINCE COMMENCEMENT OF HOSTILITIES. RANK NOW HELD
     ACCORDING TO MARCH 1919 ARMY LIST

    ------+-------+---------+------------+------------+------------+------
    Lieut.|Majors.|Captains.|Lieutenants.|    2nd     |Hon. Lieuts.|Total.
    -Cols.|       |         |            |Lieutenants.| and Qrmrs. |
    ------+-------+---------+------------+------------+------------+------
       4  |   10  |    24   |      14    |      18    |      9     |   79
    ------+-------+---------+------------+------------+------------+------


   NON-COMMISSIONED OFFICERS AND MEN DISCHARGED TO TAKE UP
     TEMPORARY COMMISSIONS WITH NEW ARMY. RANK NOW HELD
     ACCORDING TO MARCH 1919 ARMY LIST

    ---------+------------+----------------+------
    Captains.|Lieutenants.|2nd Lieutenants.|Total.
    ---------+------------+----------------+------
        30   |     64     |        199     |  293
    ---------+------------+----------------+------




                      INDEX TO NAMES OF OFFICERS


    Abbey, N. R., ii. 245, 262, 381, iii. 8, 34, 36, 39, 48, 237

    Abel-Smith, L. R., ii. 23-4, 132, 134, 284, 286, 309, 312, iii. 275

    Acland, A. W., M.C., ii. 179, 181, 240, 250, 331, 333, 334, 371,
      iii. 24, 26, 275, 288

    Acraman, W. E., M.C., D.C.M., i.  220, 255, 297, 329, 366, 373, ii.
      165, 179, 181, 240, 360, iii. 24, 79, 288, 295, 318

    Adair, A. H. S., M.C., ii. 187, 373, iii. 28, 91, 95, 96, 97, 133,
      159, 160, 161, 182, 184, 185, 186, 188, 275, 288, 291

    Adams, A. C., ii. 158, iii. 275

    Adams, C. J. N., iii. 152, 155, 179, 239

    Agar-Robartes, Hon. A. G., M.C., i. 299, 339, 341, ii. 169, 187,
      188, 242, 254, 372, 375, iii. 28, 90, 275, 288

    Agar-Robartes, Hon. A. V., M.C., i. 297, 329, 366, iii. 275, 288

    Aird, J. R., M.C., iii. 288

    Aldridge, E. A., Capt. (R.A.M.C.), i.  298, 329

    Alexander, Capt. (Irish Guards), ii.  103, 104

    Alexander, H., i. 324-5, iii. 209, 239

    Alexander, N. G. A., M.C., ii. 329, iii.  275, 288

    Alington, A. F., iii. 56, 155

    Allenby, Sir E., Gen., i. 15, ii. 267, 349, iii. 105, 136

    Ames, A., ii. 352, 353, iii. 17

    Ames, L. G., i. 88, 130, iii. 273

    Anderson, A. D., iii. 172, 176, 239

    Anderson, R., Capt. (R.A.M.C.), iii. 91

    Anderton, W. A. A. G. S., iii. 318

    Andrews, J, A., Capt., M.C.

    (R.A.M.C.), i. 366, 373, ii. 57, 66, 78, 166, 179, 182, 227, 241,
      250, 331, 361

    Andrews, N. P., iii. 122, 141, 147, 172

    Anson, A., i. 299, 339, 340, iii. 237

    Anson, F., M.C., i. 300, 305, 306, ii. 169, iii. 159, 160, 162, 183,
      187, 276, 288

    Antoine, Gen., ii. 180-81

    Antrobus, E., i. 88, 116, 130, iii. 237

    Arbuthnot, G. A., i. 372, 373, 377, ii.  78, 80, 85, iii. 239

    Arbuthnott, J., i. 367, 373, ii. 57, 60, 65, iii. 239

    Ardee, Lord, Brig.-Gen., C.B., C.B.E., i. 76, ii. 362, 383, iii. 7,
      9, 10, 11, 13, 272, 284, 292, 318

    Arnold-Forster, M. N., Lieut., M.C. (Guards Machine Gun Regiment),
      iii. 288

    Ashton, Capt. (Welsh Guards), ii. 112

    Asquith, R., i. 343, ii. 1, 87, 97, 107, iii. 209, 237, 318

    Aubrey-Fletcher, H. L., D.S.O., M.V.O., i. 87, 115, 130, 308, 309,
      310, 314, 315, 318, iii. 273, 286, 294, 318

    Ayles, F. P., iii. 239


    Bagot, Hon. W. L., iii. 318

    Bailey, Hon. G. S., i. 218, 221, 255, 279, iii. 239

    Bailey, Hon. W. R., D.S.O., i. 144, 166, 175, 201, 206, 220, 255,
      297, 329, 366, 373, ii. 51, 52, 56, 63, 78, 83, 151, 165, 179,
      181, 184, 360, 362, 363, 371, iii.  23, 66, 69, 70, 73, 74, 78,
      140, 141, 143, 146, 147, 148, 151, 171, 173, 174, 176, 177-8, 273,
      286, 287, 294, 318

    Baker, C. D., i. 355, ii. 162, 176, 177, 216, 217, iii. 235

    Ball, W. B., ii. 341, 346, 373, iii. 5, 28

    Barber, G. E., iii. 71, 74, 239

    Baring, G., Lieut.-Col. (Coldstream Guards), ii. 102

    Barrington-Kennett, B. H., i. 218, 221, 255, 258, 260, iii. 234,
      294, 318

    Battenberg, H.H. Prince Alexander of, Lieut., i. 12, 72

    Battye, P. L. M., Lieut., M.C. (Welsh Guards), i. 214, iii. 281, 288

    Beaumont-Nesbitt, F. G., M.C., i. 144, 201, 206, 297, iii. 288, 318

    Beaumont-Nesbitt, W. H., M.C., i.  329, 333, 366, 373, ii. 56, 63,
      78, 85, 242, 254, 255, 340, 342, iii.  235, 288

    Bedford, Duke of, K.G., K.B.E., A.D.C., iii. 292, 318

    Bedford, C. H., ii. 169, 348, 373, 374, iii. 28, 91

    Bennett, N. C., ii. 373, 376, 378, iii. 276

    Benson, C. E., D.S.O., ii. 171, 191, 194, 243, 244, iii. 3, 8,
      11, 276, 286, 318

    Bentinck, Capt. (Coldstream Guards), i. 60

    Bentley, F. D. (Machine Gun Company), iii. 239

    Benyon, J. W. A., iii. 209

    Benzie, Col., i. 288

    Berkley, W., Capt. (Welsh Guards), i. 315

    Best, Rev. E., iii. 56, 57

    Bevan, R. C. M., iii. 24, 27, 79, 123, 125, 281

    Bevan, T. P. M., M.C., ii. 149, 162, 175, 177, 219, 237, 238, 324,
      iii. 276, 288

    Bibby, J. P., ii. 16, 17, 237, 238, 258, 260, iii. 237

    Bibby, K. B., iii. 123, 152, 155, 179

    Bicknell, R. A. W., M.C., ii. 151, 166, 179, 241, 250, 361, iii.
      24, 288

    Bigham, Hon. C. C., C.M.G., C.B.E., iii. 292, 294, 318

    Bingham, R., Lieut.-Col. (Guards Machine Gun Regiment), iii. 186

    Bird, H., ii. 162, 176

    Blackett, W. S. B., iii. 235

    Blackwood, Lord F. T. H. T., D.S.O., i. 341, 342, ii. 151, 166

    Blackwood, Lord I. B. G. T., ii. 151, 166, 179, 181, 182, 183-4,
      iii. 239

    Bliss, E. A. D., iii. 122, 141, 142, 147, 148, 150, 276

    Blundell-Hollinshead-Blundell, C. L., O.B.E., i. 141, 308, 344, ii.
      12, 15, 17, 18

    Blunt, J. C., iii. 115, 122, 141, 147, 171, 281

    Bolton, Lieut.-Col. (Scots Guards), i. 119

    Bonham-Carter, F. G., i. 319, 323, ii. 12, iii. 209, 276, 318

    Borthwick, Hon. A. M., ii. 187, 189, 210, 214, 242, iii. 276

    Botha, General, i. 189, 265

    Boughey, C. L. F., ii. 242, 254, iii. 28, 30, 151, 155, 276

    Bowes-Lyon, G. P., i. 299, 339, ii. 1, 6, 242, 340, 342, 343,
      iii. 282

    Boyton, H. J., ii. 158, 159, iii. 237

    Brabourne, Lord, i. 190, 198, 225, 228, 230, 244, iii. 237

    Bradford, Gen., V.C., ii. 302

    Bradley, H. G. W., i. 359, 360, iii. 276

    Brierley, H., Capt., M.C. (Coldstream Guards), ii. 337

    Briscoe, R. G., M.C., ii. 179, 181, 227, 360, iii. 23, 79, 82, 83,
      90, 123, 151, 179, 288, 318

    Britten, C. R., M.C., i. 206, 214, 308, 344, 346, ii. 12, 132, 381,
      143, 284, 286, 302, 305, iii. 273, 288

    Brooke, Capt. (20th Brigade Staff), i. 133, 134

    Brough, Lieut.-Col. (Royal Engineers), i. 368-9

    Brown, A. M., M.C., iii. 67, 115, 116, 122, 147, 276, 288

    Brown, C. C., iii. 28, 91, 95, 100

    Browning, F. A. M., D.S.O., i. 335, 366,  ii. 150, 165, 179, 181,
      240, 250, 331, 333, 335, 336, 360, 364, 367, 369, 370, iii. 24,
      27, 79, 286, 318

    Bruce, R. C., M.C., ii. 238, 324, 350, 353, iii. 18, 288

    Brunton, E. R., Lieut. (R.A.M.C.), i. 308, 344, 345

    Brutton, C. P., iii. 22, 281

    Buchanan, J. N., D.S.O., M.C., i. 206, 220, 255, 297, 329, ii. 153,
      165, 179, 181, 227, 229, 230, 231, 240, iii. 286, 288

    Buchanan, R. G., iii. 67, 115, 147, 171

    Bulfin, Brig.-Gen., i. 11, 131, 134, 152, 159

    Bullough, I., Lieut. (Coldstream Guards), iii. 201, 203

    Bunbury, E. J., M.C., ii. 348, 373, iii. 28, 91, 132, 133, 159,
      160, 162, 164, 183, 189, 288

    Burke, J. B. M., M.C., ii. 22, 172, 191, 194, 222, 224, 243, 244,
      262, 263, 264, 309, 310, 311, 313, iii. 235, 288

    Burman, B., ii. 12, 13, 17, 132, 171, 173, iii. 276

    Burnand, C. F., i. 192, 198, 225, 228, 230, 244, iii. 239

    Burnett, Capt. (Gordon Highlanders), i. 127

    Burt, G. C., ii. 193, iii. 8, 34, 40, 47, 48, 276

    Burton, J. S., i. 371, 372, iii. 240

    Bury, H. S. E., i. 206, 211, iii. 240

    Butler, Hon. L. J. P., Brig.-Gen., iii. 33, 34, 35, 38, 39, 40, 44,
      53-4, 56

    Butt, J. G., Lieut. (R.A.M.C.), i. 88, 129

    Byng, Sir J., Gen., ii. 266, 267-8, 269, iii. 27-8, 59, 60

    Byng, L. G., M.C., ii. 238, 258, 260, 318, 350, iii. 17, 67, 71,
      74, 237, 288


    Cain, R. C., ii. 149

    Calvocoressi, S., iii. 92, 130, 281

    Cameron of Lochiel, D. W., Lieut-Col., C.M.G. (Cameron Highlanders),
      iii. 285, 318

    Campbell, J. L., iii. 67, 68, 281

    Campbell, J. V., Lieut.-Col., V.C., C.M.G., D.S.O. (Coldstream
      Guards), ii. 57-8, 59, 70, 71, 72, 102, iii. 168

    Campbell, K. A., D.S.O., iii. 159, 182, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188,
      195, 276, 286, 318

    Capper, T. B., Maj.-Gen., C.B., D.S.O., i. 83, 88, 94, 103, 104,
      110,  111, 115, 118, 133-4, 136, 138, 140-41, 197, 229, 238,
      244, 270-71

    Carisbrooke, Marquis of, G.C.V.O., iii. 318. See Battenberg,
      Prince Alexander of

    Carrington, C. W., D.S.O., ii. 187, 189, 210, 215, 242, 341, 342,
      343, 344, 346, 347, 373, 376, 378, iii. 276, 286, 318

    Carson, R. H., ii. 237, iii. 240

    Carstairs, C. C., M.C., ii. 107, 242, 340, 341, 346, iii. 91, 95,
      133, 182, 185-6, 276, 288

    Carter, H. G., i. 339, 366, 371, iii. 276

    Carter, J. S., ii. 361, 367, 371, iii. 24, 79, 115, 116, 117, 122,
      235

    Cary, Hon. L. P., i. 87, iii. 208, 209, 294

    Cary, Hon. P. P., i. 221, 255, 260, 328, 355, 361, ii. 237, 238,
      318, 353, iii. 18, 67, 70, 71, 72, 208, 276

    Cassy, D. W., i. 378, ii. 87, 103, 107, iii. 276

    Castle, H. H., Capt. (R.A.M.C.), ii.  317, 318, 350

    Cator, A., Lieut.-Col. (Scots Guards), i. 136, 138, 250, 313, 317,
      345, 346

    Cavan, Earl of, Gen., K.P., K.C.B., G.C.M.G., M.V.O., i. 75, 145,
      152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159-60, 161, 164, 165, 166,
      167, 168, 169, 171, 179, 183-4, 186, 205, 207, 212, 219, 261,
      262, 267-8, 274, 281, 284, 289, 294, 295, 298, 306-7, 312, 314,
      334-5, 349, 359, 368, 369, 375, ii. 9, 24, 42, 49-50, 58, 64, 83,
      143, 146, 167, 195, 200, iii. 197, 230, 231, 232, 284, 285, 293,
      318

    Cavendish, R. H. V., M.V.O., i. 143, 144, 179, 183, 201, 203, 205,
      206, 220, 274, 297, 329, 332, 333, 366, 373, ii. 372, 373-4, iii.
      28, 29, 318

    Cavendish, Hon. W. E., Brig.-Gen., M.V.O., iii. 318

    Cecil, A. W. J., iii. 208

    Cecil, Lord E. H., K.C.M.G., D.S.O., iii. 319

    Cecil, G. E., i. 13, 35, 36 (note), iii. 240

    Cecil, Hon. W. A., M.C., i. 12, 27, 61, 71-2, iii. 235, 288, 319

    Challands, R. S., iii. 122, 141, 145, 147, 148, 172, 175

    Chamberlain, N. G., ii. 176, 178, 237, 318, 323, 324, iii. 237

    Chambers, A. S., M.C., ii. 176, 178, 219, 238, 258, iii. 18, 71,
      74, 276, 288

    Champneys, W., ii. 3, 6, 87, 107, 348, 373, iii. 276

    Chapman, H. M., ii. 361, 366, iii. 281

    Chapman, J., ii. 242, 254, iii. 30, 91, 95, 133

    Chapman, M., M.C., i. 345, ii. 12, 17, 23, 243, 244, 261, 285, 288,
      289, 290, 304, 306, 309, 310, 380, iii. 8, 11, 33, 36, 38-9, 48,
      209, 235, 288

    Chappie, J. W., ii. 176, 178, 219, 221, iii. 240

    Charteris, Hon. I. A., i. 319, 323, 324-5, 326, iii. 209, 240

    Cheylesmore, Lord, Major-Gen., K.C.M.G., K.C.V.O., iii. 285, 319

    Chitty, J. M., ii. 192, 193, 222, 244, 309, 313, iii. 237

    Cholmeley, H. V., i. 328, 355, 358, iii. 240

    Cholmeley, Sir M. R. A., Bart., i.  203, 204, iii. 235

    Churchill, Rt. Hon. Winston, i. 336

    Clarke, D. H., M.C., iii. 115, 118, 119, 141, 144, 282, 288

    Clarke, S. T. S., M.C., ii. 325, 361, 364, 365, 367, 369, 372, iii.
      24, 79, 155, 288

    Clive, G. S., C.B., D.S.O., iii. 284, 285, 286, 293, 319

    Clive, H. A., M.C., i. 273, 297, 329, 331, 332, 333, iii. 288, 319

    Clive, P. A., i. 203, 206, 215, 220, 255, 258, 261, 278, iii. 234,
      319

    Clough-Taylor, E. L. F., iii. 29, 91, 95, 99, 195, 282

    Clutterbuck, Major, iii. 201

    Coffin, E. L., Lieut. (R.A.M.C.), iii. 152, 155, 179

    Colby, L. R. V., i. 88, 95, 104, 115, 130, iii. 234, 319

    Colquhoun, Sir I., Capt. (Scots Guards), ii. 103-4, 105

    Colston, Hon. E. M., C.M.G., D.S.O., M.V.O., i. 12, 27, 47, 76,
      78, iii. 285, 286, 293, 319

    Colville, Viscount, iii. 216

    Combe, T. A., i. 334, 366, 373, 374, ii. 165, 179, iii. 81, 123,
      125, 209, 276, 319

    Conant, R. J. E., iii. 70, 72, 282

    Congleton, Lord, i. 76, 144, 167, 169, 171, 181, iii. 237, 319

    Connaught, H.R.H. the Duke of, Field-Marshal, i. 196-7, 286-7,
    289, ii. 149, 154, 158, 317, 339, iii. 27, 55, 292

    Constable, D. O., ii. 13, 17, 18, 23, 138, 139, 143, iii. 240

    Cookson, Lieut.-Col., i. 84

    Cooper, A. D., D.S.O., iii. 95, 97-8, 99, 133, 286, 319

    Cooper, H. St. C., ii. 340, 343, iii. 91, 281

    Cooper, R. J., Brig.-Gen., C.B., C.V.O., iii. 272, 284, 319

    Corbett, Hon. T. G. P., M.C., ii. 353, 359, iii. 276, 288

    Corbyn, E. C., Lieut.-Col. (Bengal Lancers), ii. 336

    Corkran, C. E., Brig.-Gen., C.B., C.M.G., i. 190, 245, 247, 248,
      250, 251, 252, 267, 268-9, ii. 24, 109, 112, 115, 119, 120, 126,
      129, 157, iii. 272, 284, 285, 293, 319

    Corkran, R. S., i. 255, 274, iii. 240

    Cornforth, J. C., M.C., i. 371, ii. 165, 167, 179, 181, 240, 250,
      252, 331, 333, 334, iii. 26, 79, 83, 84, 87, 88, 90, 152, 153,
      276, 288, 291, 319

    Cornish, G. M., M.C., ii. 12, 87, 103, 107, iii. 31, 91, 130, 131,
      182, 276, 289

    Corry, A. V. L., M.C., i. 221, 222, 246, 255, 260, 279, ii. 108,
      114, 130, iii. 237, 289, 319

    Corry, N. A. L., D.S.O., i. 12, 17, 20, 21, 35, 41, 48, 51, 299,
      301, 306, 339, 340, 344, ii. 1, 2

    Cottle, W. E. W., Lieut. (Machine Gun Company), ii. 232, iii. 237

    Coventry, St. J. H., iii. 208

    Cox, P. H., iii. 36, 48, 282

    Crabbe, C. T. E., i. 299, 303, 304, 306, iii. 237

    Craig, D., D.S.O., iii. 276, 286, 319

    Craigie, J. C., M.C., i. 206, 220, 255, 329, 330, 331, 332, ii.
      169, 187, 188, 242, 254, 255, iii. 273, 289, 319

    Cranborne, Viscount, i. 216, 221, 255, 260-61

    Crawfurd, Lieut.-Col. (Coldstream Guards), ii. 201

    Crawley, A. P., iii. 319

    Creed, C. O., i. 208, 220, 255, 260, iii. 240

    Crespigny, C. R. C. de, Brig.-Gen., C.B., C.M.G., D.S.O., i. 143,
      167, 185, 217, 221, 255, 258, 286, 319, 320, 323, 355, 356, 367,
      373, 375, 376, ii. 50, 52, 54, 56, 59, 60, 75, 78, 83, 134, 165,
      168, 179, 181, 182, 184, 227, 228, 229, 240, 276-7, 279, 280,
      327, 328, 330, 332, 362, iii. 65, 69, 81, 90, 110, 111, 120, 167,
      169, 284, 285, 286, 293, 319

    Crichton, H. F., Major (Irish Guards), i. 36, iii. 234

    Crisp, F. E. F., i. 198-9, iii. 240

    Crookshank, H. F. C., i. 275, 278, 297, 329, 335, 373, ii. 56, 63,
      65, iii. 276

    Crosland, C., i. 298, iii. 209, 277

    Cruttenden, C., ii. 317, 318, 324, iii. 70, 75, 78, 277

    Cubitt, C. C., M.C., i. 378, ii. 56, 66, iii. 56, 123, 152, 155,
      179, 180, 277, 289

    Cunliffe-Owen, Col., i. 177

    Cunninghame, A. K. S., i. 13, 144, 201, 206, 220, 255, 297, 366,
      373, ii. 56, 59, 64, 78, 80, 85, iii. 235, 319


    Dalhousie, Lord, Lieut. (Scots Guards), i. 122

    Dalkeith, Earl of, i. 245, 248, 319, 323, 355, 361

    Dalmeny, Lord, D.S.O., M.C., iii. 277, 286, 289, 319

    Dalrymple, Viscount, Major (Scots Guards), i. 117, 119

    Darby, M. A. A., i. 88, 130, 138, 198, 200, 226, 231, 244, iii. 237,
      319

    Darrell, Lieut.-Col., i. 281, 368

    Dashwood, W. J., ii. 120, 150, 162, 163, 175, 177, 218, 219, 220,
      iii. 237

    Davies, Col. (Oxfordshire Light Infantry), i. 169, 176

    Davies, Sir F. J., Lieut.-Gen., K.C.B., K.C.M.G., i. 11, 190, iii.
      284, 285, 293, 319

    Dawnay, H., Col. (Household Cavalry), i. 168

    Dawson-Greene, C. J., ii. 316, 381, iii. 8, 12, 240

    Dearden, H., Lieut. (R.A.M.C.), ii. 189, 242, 254, 341

    De Cerjat, C. S., ii. 162

    De Geijer, E. N., M.C., ii. 376, iii. 28, 91, 94, 95, 96, 133, 134,
      183, 186, 277, 289

    Delacombe, R., M.C., iii. 29, 91, 95, 99, 277, 289

    De Lisle, A. P. J. M. P., ii. 363, 367, 370, iii. 81, 83, 86, 90,
      277

    De Lisle, Sir H. de B., Lieut.-Gen., iii. 33, 48-9

    Denman, R. C., ii. 192, 193, 244, 262, 286, 309, 311, iii. 240

    Denny, J. A., i. 211, iii. 277

    Dent, W. H. S., M.C., ii. 150, 240, 331, 334, iii. 24, 79, 123,
      124, 151, 179, 195, 277, 289

    Derby, Earl of, i. 214, 268

    D'Erlanger, L. F. A., iii. 67, 115, 147, 172

    Derriman, G. L., i. 220, 255, 276-7, iii. 235

    D'Esperey, Franchet, Gen., i. 43

    Des Vœux, F. W., i. 12, 61, 62, iii. 237

    Dickinson, T. M., i. 246, 248, 249, iii. 277

    Diggle, W. H., D.S.O., M.C., iii. 286, 289, 319

    Donnison, F. S. V., ii. 242, 373, iii. 133, 163, 164

    Douglas-Pennant, Hon. A. G. S., i. 88, 130, iii. 237

    Douglas-Pennant, Hon. G. H., i. 192, 198, 225, 228, 243-4, iii.
      235, 319

    Dowling, C. M. C., i. 144, 178, 181, 300, 304, 306, 340, 342, iii.
      274

    Drummond, F. H. J., M.C., ii. 182, 227, 231, 232, 234, 328, 331,
      334, iii. 24, 25, 80, 123, 124, 277, 289

    Drury-Lowe, W. D., D.S.O., i. 364, ii. 108, 113, 118, 123, 125,
      126, iii. 235, 286, 319

    Duberly, E. H. J., M.C., i. 192, 197, 225, 231, 239, 243, 248, 250,
      319, 323, 355, 361, ii. 108, 123, 162, iii. 289, 319

    Duberly, G. W., i. 141, 225, 228, 233, 238, 239, 240, 243, iii.
      206, 234, 319

    Du Cane, Sir J. P., Lieut.-Gen., iii. 32

    Duckworth-King, Sir G., Bart., i.  88, 116, 130, 136-7, iii. 208,
      274

    Dudley-Smith, C. J., i. 246, 248, 258, 267, iii. 240

    Dufferin and Ava, Marquis of, D.S.O., iii. 274

    Dunlop, B. J., ii. 188, 189, 210, 213-14, iii. 237

    Dunlop, L. E., ii. 189

    Dunville, R. L., iii. 277

    Duquenoy, M., ii. 8, 169, 187, 188, 242, iii. 319

    D'Urbal, Gen., i. 187

    Durbin, P., ii. 373, 374, 376, 377, iii. 240

    Dury, G. A. I., M.C., ii. 187, 373, 375, iii. 28, 91, 128, 130,
      277, 289


    Earle, M., C.B., C.M.G., D.S.O., i. 87, 108, 116, 119, 121, 129,
      iii. 272, 284, 285, 319

    Early, J. L., Capt. (U.S.M.O.R.C.), iii. 24, 80

    East, G. W., Capt. (R.A.M.C.), ii. 210, 215

    Eastwood, J. F., ii. 162, 176

    Eaton, Hon. F. O. H., D.S.O., i. 299, 303, 305, 339, 341, ii. 1,
      6, 169, 187, 188, 210, 211, 212, 213, 214, iii. 286, 320

    Eaton, Hon. H. E., i. 343, ii. 1, 11, 242, 254, iii. 277

    Echlin, R. F. W., i. 355, 361, ii. 123, 165, 176, 178, 351, 354,
      iii. 17, 67, 115, 147

    Edwards, G., Capt. (Coldstream Guards), i. 180

    Eliot-Cornell, R. W., ii. 242, iii. 277

    Ellice, A. R., ii. 135, 138, 143, iii. 237

    Ellice, E. C., D.S.O., iii. 201, 202, 205, 208, 286, 320

    Elliott, A. G., M.C., ii. 187, 188, 209, 215, iii. 28, 91, 277, 289

    Ellison, C. E. M., M.C., i. 307, 311, 314, 344, iii. 277, 289

    Ellison, P. J. M., ii. 373, 375, 380

    Ennor, F. H., ii. 237, 238, 258, 324, 350, 352

    Ethelston, H. W., i. 198, 225, 228, 230, 232, 233, 239, 244, iii.
      237

    Evans, W. B., Lieut. (U.S.M.O.R.C.), iii. 18, 67, 71, 113

    Eyre, J. B., M.B.E., i. 204, iii. 209, 277, 292


    Fairbairn, S. G., M.C., iii. 92, 95, 133, 159, 183, 186, 289

    Farquhar, R., M.C., ii. 26, 132, 133, 138, 142, 157, 172, 191,
      193, 222, 244, iii. 209, 237, 289

    Farquharson, M. G., M.C., iii. 122, 141, 147, 172, 195, 289

    Feilding, G., Maj.-Gen., i. 41, 48, 57, 58, 61, 274-5, 277, 278,
      280, 284, 295, 298, 336, 350-51, 368, ii. 3, 9, 24, 32, 38, 41,
      58, 64, 106, 133, 146, 157, 172, 192, 195, 201, 204, 246, 249,
      270, 271, 272, 276, 277, 280, 303, 326, 353, 383, iii. 62, 65,
      90, 107, 197, 205

    Fergusson, Sir C., Bart., Lieut.-Gen., K.C.B., K.C.M.G., D.S.O.,
      M.V.O., i. 12, 264, ii. 362, iii. 1, 284, 285, 320

    Ffoulkes, Capt. (R.A.M.C.), iii. 28

    Filmer, Sir R. M., Bart., M.C., i. 288, 340, 347, 348, 349, ii.
      13-14, iii. 235, 289

    Filmer-Strangways-Rogers, A. E. F., iii. 159, 183, 185, 240

    Finch, H. A., iii. 26, 83, 90, 240

    Fish, H. C., Lieut. (U.S.R.), ii. 373, 376, 378

    Fisher-Rowe, C. V., M.C., i. 141, 197, 225, 235, 238-9, 240, 244,
      ii. 150, 176, iii. 274, 289, 294, 320

    Fisher-Rowe, L. G., M.C., i. 355, 362, ii. 108, 113, 114, 118, 162,
      163, 164, 176, 177, 217, 238, 258, 318, iii. 289

    Fisher-Rowe, L. R., i. 190, 197, 198-9, 225, 228, 230, 236, 243,
      245, iii. 234, 320

    Fitch, C. A., iii. 24, 25, 172, 282

    FitzClarence, C., Brig.-Gen., V.C., i. 100, 174, 176

    Fitzgerald, E. G. A., D.S.O., ii. 188, 242, 254, 257, 373, 375,
      379, iii. 28, 90, 133, 159, 277, 286, 320

    Fleet, W. A., ii. 236, 237, 353, iii. 18, 19, 22, 240

    Fletcher, G. H., i. 211, iii. 240

    Flower, A. C., ii. 25, 132, 138, 143, iii. 240

    Flower, N. A. C., ii. 123, 125, iii. 277

    Foch, General, i. 43, iii. 16, 59, 105, 166

    Follett, G. B. S., Brig.-Gen., ii. 328, 362, 375, iii. 63, 69, 78,
      110, 114

    Forbes, A. H., ii. 317, 325, iii. 98

    Forbes, Lord, iii. 210

    Fortune, Capt. (Black Watch), i. 176

    Forgety, C. A., Lieut. (U.S.M.O.R.C.),  ii. 354

    Foster, A. C., i. 226, 228, 230, 244, iii. 240

    Foulkes, Major (Royal Engineers), i. 215

    Fox, Capt. (Scots Guards), i. 117, 119

    Fox-Pitt, W. A. L., iii. 320

    Fraser, J. C., M.C. (Machine Gun Company), iii. 237, 289

    Freeman-Greene, H., iii. 151, 172, 175, 176

    French, Sir John, Field-Marshal, i. 18, 21, 22, 29, 32, 35-6,
      44-5, 46, 54-6, 68, 79, 80, 84, 97, 106, 107, 111, 141-2, 143,
      149, 151, 163-4, 172, 187, 224, 244-5, 247, 282, 287, 290, 322

    Frere, J. H., ii. 318, 351, 353, iii. 277

    Freyberg, B. C., V.C., C.M.G., D.S.O., iii. 285, 288

    Fryer, E. R. M., M.C., i. 278, 298, 329, 330, 340, ii. 1, 6, 187,
      188, 209, 211, 212, 214, 215, 242, iii. 30, 91, 95, 96, 98, 99,
      128, 133, 159, 160, 277, 289, 291


    Gardner, C. G., ii. 12, 87, 98, 107, iii. 237

    Gardner, S. Y. P., M.C., ii. 163, 176, 177, 219, 237, iii. 277, 289

    Garton, W., O.B.E., iii. 225, 295, 320

    Gascoigne, E. F. O., C.M.G., D.S.O., iii. 294, 320

    Gascoigne, I. C., ii. 317, 352, iii. 237, 285

    Gathorne-Hardy, Hon. J. F., C.B., C.M.G., D.S.O., iii. 284, 285,
      286, 293, 320

    Gault, R. A., ii. 17, 132, 134-5, iii. 240

    Gelderd-Somervell, R. F. C., i. 199, 226, 231, 232, 244, iii. 240

    George, S. C. K., ii. 338, 361, 367, iii. 79, 82

    George V., H.M. King, i. 10, 15-16, 172, 191-2, 195, 201-2, 245,
      286, 288-9, 326-7, 342, 364-5, ii. 12, 143-4, iii. 195, 196, 197,
      198-9, 213, 233

    Gerard, C. R., D.S.O., i. 144, 201, 206, ii. 193, 222, 244, 285,
      306, 309, 313, 380, iii. 8, 33, 36, 38, 54, 55, 56, 286, 320

    Gibbon, H. J., M.C., iii. 29, 91, 133, 134, 135, 159, 183, 289

    Gibbs, 2nd Lieut. (Scots Guards), i. 122

    Gilbey, A. J., iii. 8, 10, 282

    Giles, C. C. T., ii. 338, 360, iii. 83, 87, 90, 277

    Gillett, H. V., iii. 55, 56, 57

    Gillilan, Major (Coldstream Guards), iii. 54

    Gladwin, Lieut. (Scots Guards), i. 117

    Glanusk, Lord, C.B., C.B.E., D.S.O., iii. 292, 320

    Gleichen, Lord E.,  K.C.V.O., C.B., C.M.G., D.S.O., iii. 293, 320

    Glyn, A. St. L., i. 335, 336, 357, 360, 361, 363, 366, 367, 370,
      iii. 208, 294, 320

    Godman, G. W., ii. 338, 373, iii. 28, 91, 183, 186, 277

    Gordon, C. A., M.C., iii. 26, 278, 289

    Gordon, H. P., iii. 92, 130, 282

    Gordon-Gilmour, R. G., C.B., C.V.O., D.S.O., iii. 216, 320

    Gordon-Lennox, Lord B. C., i. 12, 17, 26, 28, 40, 48, 57, 64,
      70, 73, 76, 144, 148, 153, 155, 157, 161, 171, 181, 210, iii.
      234, 320

    Gordon-Lennox, V. C. H., ii. 150, iii. 209, 278

    Gort, Viscount, V.C.,  D.S.O., M.V.O., M.C., i. 262, ii. 191, 193,
      194, 222, 225, 226, 244, 261, 262, 274, 285, 288, 304, 306, 307,
      308, 309, 314, 352, 354, 356, iii. 17, 21, 61, 66, 69, 74, 75,
      76, 77, 78, 107, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117-19, 121-122,
      126, 274, 284, 286, 287, 288, 289, 295, 320

    Goschen, C. G., i. 192, 198, 225, 228, 231, 239, 243, 248, 269, ii.
      16, 17, 18, 130, 138, 139, 143, iii. 235

    Goschen, G. G., i. 204, iii. 278

    Gosselin, A. B. R. R., D.S.O., i. 12, 40, 61, 62, 72, 206, 214, ii.
      235, 286, 320

    Gough, Capt., i. 185

    Gough, H., Lieut.-Gen., i. 81, 266, 270, 277, 291

    Graff, J. H., Capt. (U.S.M.O.R.C.), iii. 95, 133, 159

    Graham, A. C., i. 359, 362, ii. 108, 109, 113, 114, 130, iii. 235

    Graham, H. A. R., i. 214, iii. 208, 274

    Graham, J. W., i. 359, 360, iii. 278

    Grant, A., iii. 67, 115, 120, 122, 240

    Grant, J. C. B., Capt. (R.A.M.C.), i. 355, 362, ii. 162, 176, 178,
      219, 236, 258

    Green, G. R., M.C., ii. 191, 193, 222, 244, 381, iii. 8, 34, 35,
      36, 48, 278

    Greenhill, F. W. R., ii. 187, 189, 210, 242, 254, 257, iii. 240

    Greenwood, J. E., iii. 8, 34, 36, 48, 56, 57, 278, 320

    Greer, E. B., Lieut.-Col. (Irish Guards), ii. 206

    Gregson, L. M., O.B.E., iii. 292, 320

    Gregson-Ellis, P. G. S., iii. 53, 55, 56, 57

    Grellier, N., Capt., M.C. (R.A.M.C.), ii. 132, 138, 172, 191, 194,
      222, 245, 262, 286, 381, iii. 8, 34, 36, 56, 57

    Greville, C. H., D.S.O., i. 192, 245, 246, 248, 323, ii. 172, 191,
      193, 194, 222, 226, 353, iii. 17, 171, 274, 286, 320

    Grey, R., D.S.O., i. 79, iii. 286, 295, 320

    Grigg, E. W. M., C.M.G., D.S.O., M.C., i. 275, 297, 329, 366, ii.
      93, 94, iii. 285, 286, 289, 320

    Guernsey, Lord (Irish Guards), i. 62

    Gunnis, G. G., M.C., i. 299, 339, 341, ii. 1, 6, 87, 98, iii. 236,
      289, 320

    Gunnis, I. FitzG. S., ii. 179, 180, 181, 182, 184-5, iii. 282

    Gunther, G. R., M.C., iii. 91, 133, 159, 163, 182, 186, 240, 289

    Guthrie, Sir C. T. R. S., K.B.E., i.  192, 198, 225, 228, 244, iii.
      278, 292

    Gwyer, C., iii. 25, 83, 86, 90, 237


    Hague, C. N., M.C., iii. 289, 320

    Haig, Sir Douglas, Field-Marshal, i. 10, 15, 48, 98, 99, 102, 113,
      151, 155, 158, 184, 225, 247, 281, 290, 293, 322, 349, ii. 27,
      28, 144, 145-6, 160, 266, 267, 268, 284, 339, iii. 50-51, 59, 105,
      137

    Haking, Lieut.-Gen., i. 11, 285, 368

    Halford, C. H., iii. 208

    Hall, C. A., M.C., ii. 169, 187, 189, iii. 278, 289, 320

    Hall, C. B., iii. 141, 147, 150, 282

    Hall-Watt, R., ii. 237, 238, 258, 261, iii. 240

    Hambro, C. J., Lieut. (Coldstream Guards), ii. 201

    Hamilton, Lieut. (Gordon Highlanders), i. 135

    Hamilton, Maj.-Gen., i. 12

    Hamilton, Lord C. N., D.S.O., M.V.O., i. 87, 109, 117, 138, 269,
      273, 356, iii. 286, 320

    Hamilton, G. C., C.M.G., D.S.O., i.  12, 26, 57, 59, 144, 153, 161,
      166, 177, 288, 289, 307, 308, 310, 313, 318, ii. 159, 171, 190,
      iii. 209, 210, 273, 285, 286, 320

    Hamilton, G. E. A. A. FitzG., ii. 354, iii. 18, 22, 240

    Hanbury, Lieut. (Irish Guards), iii. 202

    Hanham, Sir J. L., Bart., ii. 341, 344, iii. 278

    Hanning, G. H., ii. 240, 241, 361, 366, iii. 278

    Harbord, P. A. A., M.C., ii. 181, 227, 240, 331, 334, iii. 240, 289

    Harcourt-Vemon, E. G., M.C., iii. 152, 155, 179, 289

    Harcourt-Vernon, G. C. FitzH., D.S.O., M.C., i. 12, 63, 373, ii.
      51, 57, 63, 78, 85, 167, 179, 181, 241, 250, 330, 331, 337, 361,
      362, 367, iii. 24, 27, 79, 122, 123, 124, 125, 208, 274, 286,
      289, 320

    Hardinge, Hon. A. H. L., M.C., ii. 158, 172, 191, 284, 309, 311,
      312, 381, iii. 34, 56, 57, 278, 289

    Hargreaves, Capt. (Irish Guards), ii. 126

    Hargreaves, S. J., ii. 317, 318, 350, iii. 18, 22, 240

    Harrison, C. E., C.M.G., C.V.O., M.B., F.R.G.S., iii. 285, 320

    Harter, H. H., iii. 238

    Hartley, 2nd Lieut. (Coldstream Guards), iii. 227

    Harvard, K. O'G., ii. 123, 125, 166, 167, 179, 181, 227, 231, 233,
      iii. 238

    Harvard, L. de J., i. 356, 362, ii. 108, 179, 238, 258, 318, 320,
      350, 353, 354, 358, iii. 241

    Harvey, D., i. 367, 373, 378, ii. 57, 66, 368, 370, iii. 241

    Hasler, A., i. 378, ii. 57, 60, 65, iii. 241

    Hawkesworth, E. G., M.C., ii. 258, 318, 350, 353, iii. 17, 67, 69,
      70, 74, 75, 76, 78, 278, 289

    Hay, Lord A. (Irish Guards), i. 62

    Hay, Lord E. D. J., ii. 193, 194

    Head, Major (R.H.A.), i. 109

    Healy, C. H. C., ii. 120, 125, iii. 278

    Heasman, F. J., M.C., ii. 7, 187, 210, 211, 215, 242, 254, 373,
      iii. 28, 91, 289

    Henderson, K., ii. 187, 188, 209, 212-13, 215, iii. 278

    Henderson, R. K., iii. 28, 91, 130, 282

    Heneage, E., i. 319, 323, iii. 320

    Heneage, G. C. W., D.S.O., i. 287, iii. 286, 320

    Herbert, C. G. Y., M.C., iii. 289

    Hermon-Hodge, Hon. L. St. L., M.C., i. 297, 329, 330, 340, ii. 1,
      4, 186, iii. 27, 79, 123, 124, 155, 156, 179, 278, 289

    Hermon-Hodge, Hon. R. H., D.S.O., iii. 286, 294, 320

    Hervey-Bathurst, Sir F. E. W., Bart., D.S.O., i. 287, iii. 287, 321

    Hewitt, C. J., iii. 278

    Heywood, C. P., Brig.-Gen., ii. 35, iii. 139, 146, 168, 175

    Heywood-Lonsdale, H. H., D.S.O., iii. 287

    Heyworth, F. J., Brig.-Gen., D.S.O., i. 190, 227, 229, 230, 239,
      252, 268, 285, 289, 295, 307, 308, 309, 310, 311, 312, 313, 315,
      317, 320, 347, 360-61, 368, ii. 15, 21

    Higginson, Sir G., Gen., iii. 209-10

    Higginson, T. C., i. 300, iii. 238

    Hilton-Parry, W., Capt. (R.A.M.C.), ii. 13

    Hirst, G. F. R., M.C., i. 300, 305, 340,  342, ii. 11, 87, 169,
      187, 189, 242, 254, 255, iii. 30, 91, 95, 96, 97, 128, 278, 289

    Hoare, E., i. 359, 360, iii. 241

    Hoare, E. R. D., i. 308, 309, 319, ii. 191, 245, 262, 286, 381,
      iii. 278

    Hoare, G. H. R·, ii. 338, 340, 341, 342, iii. 278

    Hobart, C. V. C., C.B.E., D.S.O., iii.  292, 321

    Holbech, L., D.S.O., M.C., ii. 169, 187, 189, 209, 242, 373, 375,
      376, 380, iii. 151, 153, 155, 156, 157, 179, 195, 278, 287, 290, 321

    Hollins, C. B., ii. 242, 340, 343, iii. 133, 159, 278

    Holmes, R. E. I., iii. 18, 19, 22, 282

    Home, Hon. W. S. D., Maj.-Gen., iii. 226

    Hood, Viscount, O.B.E., iii. 292, 321

    Hope, G. E., M.C., i. 88, 119, 130, 137, iii. 234, 290, 321

    Hope, P. S., i. 362

    Hopley, F. J. V. B., D.S.O., i. 336, ii.  1, 6, 87, 106, 107, iii.
      209, 278, 287, 321

    Hopley, G. W. V., i. 206, 212, iii. 241

    Hore-Ruthven, Hon. W. P., G.S.O.I., i. 160, 368

    Hornby, M. C. St. J., iii. 58

    Horne, D. E. A., ii. 309, 311, iii. 282

    Horne, H. S., Gen., i. 272, 277, 280-81, iii. 48, 49-50

    Houstoun-Boswall, Sir G., Bart., i. 307, 310, 312, 314, 318, iii.
      236

    Howell, F. D. G., Capt. (R.A.M.C.), i. 72, 201, 206, 221, 255

    Hubbard, B. J., M.C., ii. 172, 191, 193, 222, 223, 245, 309, 310,
      311, iii. 241, 290

    Hubbard, J. F., O.B.E., iii. 292

    Huggan, Lieut. (R.A.M.C.), i. 70

    Hughes, G., iii. 67, 69, 238

    Hughes, J. S., M.C., i. 143, 144, 166, 180, 201, 206, 217, 245, 248,
      250, 251, ii. 341, 343, 344, iii.  57, 274, 290, 321

    Hulme, Lieut., iii. 98


    Imeretinsky, Prince G., iii. 282

    Ingleby, I. H., i. 297, 329, ii. 12, 17, 171, 191, 193, 222, 244,
      303, 308, 380, iii. 8, 33, 55, 56, 321

    Inglis, G., i. 326, 355

    Inglis-Jones, J. A., iii. 126, 282

    Irby, C. E., M.C., ii. 172, 191, 193, 222, 244, 285, 309, 314,
      315, 381, iii. 8, 34, 55, 56, 57, 278, 290

    Irvine, A. F., i. 336, 366, 373, 374, 376, ii. 78, 80, 85, iii.
      209, 278


    Jackson, G. D., ii. 3, 6, 87, 103, 107, iii. 241

    Jackson, H. K., Brig.-Gen., D.S.O., i. 84

    Jacob, J. H., ii. 151, 179, 182, 227, 231, 234, 368, 371, iii. 278

    Jeffreys, G. D., C.B., C.M.G., i. 13, 20, 35, 38, 48, 49, 59, 61,
      64, 65, 67, 70, 72, 144, 163, 174, 180, 201, 206, 220, 255, 258,
      261, 262, 273, 297, 329, 331, 334, 335-6, 337, 366, 367, ii. 2,
      153, 208, 240, iii. 155, 272, 284, 285, 293, 294, 321

    Jesper, L. C., iii. 115, 117, 122, 282

    Jesper, N. McK., M.C., i. 339, 366, 373, ii. 56, 61, 66, iii. 27,
      80, 83, 85, 87, 90, 278, 290

    Joffre, General, i. 18, 21, 32, 44, 80, 191, 266, 290, ii. 27, 145

    Johnson, H. J. G., ii. 176, 178, 219, 236, iii. 238

    Johnston, C. F., ii. 107

    Joicey-Cecil, J. F. J., ii. 26, 136, 138, 143, iii. 209, 238

    Joicey-Cecil, Lord J. P., iii. 321

    Jones, B. H., iii. 67, 115, 116, 120, 122, 278

    Jones, Capt., iii. 201


    Kaye, Capt. (Manchester Regiment), iii. 67

    Keating, H. S., iii. 238

    Keith, C. G., M.C., ii. 13, 17, 18, 132, 133, 138, 141, 142, 171,
      191, 193, 194, iii. 290

    Kemble, Capt. (Scots Guards), i. 122

    Kendall, R. Y. T., ii. 26, 131, 240, 331, 334, iii. 209, 279

    Kennaway, C. G., iii. 115, 122, 141, 142, 147, 148, 172, 173, 175

    Kenyon-Slaney, R. O. R., i. 87, 130, iii. 208, 274

    Kerr, C., Lieut. (Australian Infantry), iii. 51, 52

    Kerry, Earl of, Lieut.-Col., D.S.O., M.V.O., (Irish Guards), iii.
      321

    Keyes, Sir Roger, iii. 136

    King, D. L., iii. 81, 123, 152, 155, 179, 321

    King, E. G. L., i. 359, 362, ii. 108, 109, 176, 177, 178, iii. 241

    Kingsmill, A. de P., D.S.O., M.C., i. 208, 298, 329, 366, iii. 274,
      287, 290, 321

    Kinloch, Sir D. A., Bart., Brig-Gen., C.B., M.V.O., iii. 321

    Kitchener, Earl, Field-Marshal, i. 9, 13-14, 172, 286, 287, 297,
      354, 362, 367

    Knatchbull-Hugessen, M. A., M.C., i. 275, 298, 329, 366, ii. 76,
      78, 80-81, 85, iii. 238, 290, 321

    Knight, D. J., ii. 193, 245, 262, 381

    Knollys, A. C., M.C., ii. 242, 341, 342, 345, 346, 373, 376, 378,
      iii. 24, 279, 290


    Lambert, R. S., M.C., i. 88, 116, 117, 130, 344, ii. 12, 17, 132,
      138, 171, 190, iii. 274, 290, 321

    Lambton, G., Lieut. (Coldstream Guards), i. 36 (_note_)

    Lamont, G. S., D.S.O., iii. 71, 115, 147, 172, 173, 241, 287, 321

    Landon, Brig.-Gen., i. 11

    Lang, A. H., i. 208, 211, iii. 241

    Langley, F. J., ii. 338, 361, 367, 372, iii. 27, 79, 83, 87, 90, 241

    Lascelles, Viscount, D.S.O., i. 266, 267, 319, 323, 324, 325, 355,
      356, 362, 363, ii. 56, 64, 65, 177, 237, 350, 351, iii. 29, 30,
      90, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 159, 160, 161, 163,
      164, 182, 184, 186, 187, 189, 201, 274, 287, 321

    Lawford, A. B., i. 245, 248

    Lawford, R. D., M.C., i. 216, 221, 355, 362, ii. 123, 125, 162, 176,
      177, 218, 219, 220, 317, 318, 320, 323, 350, 353, iii. 17, 66,
      114, 279, 290

    Lawford, S., Brig.-Gen., i. 83, 90

    Lawrence, B. L., ii. 149, 162, 177, iii. 279

    Lawrence, G. F., iii. 24, 25, 79, 82, 83, 90, 238

    Lawes, R. L. M., ii. 245, 381, iii. 8, 34, 40, 54, 55, 57

    Lawson, J., Capt. (R.A.M.C.), iii. 183

    Lawson-Johnston, A. McW., M.C., ii. 78, 81, 165, 167-8, iii. 238,
      290

    Layland-Barratt, F. H. G., M.C., ii. 78, 81, 165, 179, 181, 227,
      240, 328, 331, 336, iii. 279, 290

    Layton, B. C., i. 308, 316, 344, ii. 13, 17, 20, 26, 309, 315, 381,
      iii. 56, 57, 279

    Leatham, R. E. K., D.S.O., i. 88, 116, 130, iii. 273, 287, 294, 321

    Lee-Steere, J. H. G., i. 178, 179, 181, iii. 241

    Leeke, C., i. 319, 323, 358, iii. 238

    Legh, Hon. P. W., O.B.E., iii. 292, 321

    Leigh-Pemberton, R. D., M.C., i. 308, 344, iii. 58, 290

    Leslie, Sir J., Bart., Col. (R. Innis. Fusiliers), iii. 321

    Lessing, A. E., O.B.E., iii. 292, 321

    Lethbridge, Sir W. P. C., Bart., iii. 208

    Leveson-Gower, R. H. G., ii. 172, 191, 193

    Lewis, Lieut. (R.F.A.), iii. 39

    Lindsay, W., Capt. (R.A.M.C.), iii. 119, 141, 147, 172

    Lister, W. H., Capt., D.S.O., M.C. (R.A.M.C.), ii. 368

    Llewelyn, H., ii. 109, iii. 209, 279

    Lloyd, A. H. O., Brig.-Gen., C.B., C.M.G., M.V.O., iii. 285, 321

    Lloyd, Sir F., Lieut.-Gen., G.C.V.O., K.C.B., D.S.O., iii. 107, 209,
      293, 321

    Lloyd, J. A., ii. 237, 258, 318, 350, 353, 354, iii. 17, 67, 70,
      141, 171, 195, 321

    Lloyd, M. K. A., i. 376, ii. 56, 59, 65, iii. 202, 203, 236

    Loch, Lord, C.B., C.M.G., D.S.O., M.V.O., i. 12, 13, 17, iii. 284,
      285, 293, 321

    Loftus, D. F., iii. 208

    Loftus, F. P., ii. 331, 336, 361, iii. 24, 80, 209

    Logan, A. T., Lieut. (R.A.M.C.), i. 300, 340, ii. 1, 6, 87

    Lomax, Major-Gen., i. 11, 100, 156

    Long, E. C., ii. 338, 340, 343, iii. 279

    Long, H. M., Lieut. (U.S.A.M.S.), ii. 361

    Lovell, W. H., M.C., i. 365, ii. 108, 162, 176, 177, 218, 318, 350,
      352, iii. 114, 116, 121, 122, 279, 290

    Lowther, H. C., Brig.-Gen., i. 287

    Lubbock, Hon. H. F. P., ii. 371, iii. 24-25, 238

    Ludlow, E., i. 307, 344, ii. 12, 17, iii. 7

    Lyautey, Gen., ii. 173

    Lycett-Green, F. D., i. 299, 304, 306, iii. 279

    Lygon, Hon. R., M.V.O., M.C., i. 141, 198, 226, 231, 233, 234-235,
      239, 240, 241-242, 243, iii. 208, 290, 321

    Lyon, F. C., ii. 12, 316, 381, iii. 8, 11, 34, 40, 42, 47, 48, 238

    Lyttelton, Rev. Hon. C. F., M.C., ii. 182, 241, iii. 24, 80

    Lyttelton, O., D.S.O., M.C., i. 216, 221, 255, 281, 341, ii. 1, 6,
      86, 101, 103, 104, 105, 169, iii. 287, 290, 321


    Macdonald, G. G., iii. 208

    Macdonald, I., iii. 8

    MacDougall, I., i. 12, 35, iii. 236

    M'Ewen, Col. (Camerons), i. 176

    Mackay, Lieut. (Machine Gun Guards), ii. 345, 346

    Mackenzie, A. K., i. 12, 49, 63, ii. 7, 87, 97, 107, iii. 236

    Mackenzie, H. W. R., i. 88, 135, 138

    Mackinnon, Sir W. H., Gen., G.C.B., K.C.B., K.C.V.O., iii. 284

    MacLear, B. G. H., M.C., ii. 16, 17, 18, 25-6, iii. 238, 290

    MacMahon, Gen., ii. 170

    Macmillan, M. H., i. 308, 316, 317, 319, 373, 375-376, ii. 51, 56,
      60, 61, 65, iii. 279

    Magnay, F. A., ii. 186, 240, 331, 334, iii. 28, 279

    Maine, H. C. S., ii. 135, 138, 139, 143, iii. 279

    Maitland, Lieut. (Scots Guards), iii. 202

    Major, E. L., Lieut. (U.S. Army), iii. 83, 123

    Makgill-Crichton-Maitland, M. E., D.S.O., i. 143, 144, 146, 181,
      245, 248, 250, 251, 319, 323, 327, 343, 363, ii. 1, 4, 6, 11,
      108, 109, 118, 123, 162, 164, 175, 176, 177, 218, 221, 237, 258,
      262, 318, 321, 350, 352, iii. 210, 273, 287, 321

    Malcolm, P., i. 308, 318, iii. 17, 67, 70, 75, 78, 236

    Manley, W. B. L., iii. 29, 91, 130, 282

    Manners, Hon. F. H., M.C., ii. 150, 165, 179, 181, 240, 250, 251,
      361, 371, 372, iii. 209, 279, 290

    Manners, Hon. J. N., i. 12, 34, 35, iii. 238

    Marshall, Major (Manchester Regiment), iii. 67

    Marshall, F. G., i. 144, 201, 206, 217, iii. 238

    Marshall, Sir W. R., Gen., ii. 267, 349

    Marsham, Hon. S. E., iii. 55, 56, 123

    Martin, F., iii. 321

    Matheson, T. G., Major-Gen., C.B., i. 64, 65, iii. 108, 110, 114,
      137, 146, 169

    Maude, Sir S., Gen., ii. 161, 175, 236, 267

    Maunoury, Gen., i. 43, 46

    Maurice, F. T., ii. 176, 237, iii. 238

    Maxwell, A. E., i. 86, iii. 236

    Mays, C. C., ii. 237, 238, 258, 318, 350, 353, 354, 358, iii. 241

    Meikle, R. M., ii. 382

    Mildmay, A. S. L. St. J., M.C., i. 198, 226, 231, 244, ii. 181, 227,
      230, 231, 232, 234, iii. 208, 279, 290

    Miller, D., i. 78, 146

    Miller, E. E., iii. 209

    Miller, F. W. J. M., i. 12, 144, 181, iii. 238

    Minchin, T. W., D.S.O., i. 339, 366, 373, ii. 51, 52, 57, 66, 382,
      iii. 8, 13, 34, 40, 41, 42, 43, 47, 279, 287, 321

    Minne, Monsieur, ii. 6

    Mitchell, C., D.S.O., O.B.E., i. 137, 138, 193, 198, 245, 246, 248,
      ii. 26, 127, iii. 287, 292, 321

    Moller, A. A., M.C., i. 198, 319, 323, 355, ii. 237, 238, 258, 350,
      352, iii. 17, 67, 290

    Molyneux-Montgomerie, G. F., i. 299, 301, 302, 305, 339, 342, iii.
      234

    Monro, Sir C., Lieut.-Gen., i. 11, 37, 38, 173, 209, 272

    Montagu, Hon. S. A. S., ii. 361, 367, 370, 371, iii. 24, 79

    Montagu-Douglas-Scott, Lord F. G., D.S.O., iii. 210, 225

    Morgan, H. B. G., M.C., ii. 239, 250, 361, 367, iii. 79, 83, 84,
      88, 89, 90, 155, 156, 282, 290

    Morley, Hon. C. H., i. 245, 248, 251, iii. 279, 322

    Morris, A. A., iii. 55, 70, 75, 115, 120, 122, 238

    Morris, Hon. G., Col. (Irish Guards), i. 20, 36

    Morrison, J. A., D.S.O., i. 190, 194, 197, 198, 199, 246, 307, 309,
      311, 315-316, 317, 318, 328, 344, 345, ii. 12, 16, iii. 210, 274,
      287, 322

    Moss, G. C. G., i. 88, 245, 248, 250, 251

    Moussy, Gen., i. 146

    Murray, Sir A., Gen., ii. 161

    Murray, W. R. C., i. 86, 300, 305, 306, iii. 236

    Murray-Threipland, W., D.S.O., i. 311, 312, ii. 109, 110, 111, 119,
      iii. 287, 293, 322

    Mylne, Lieut. (Irish Guards), ii. 102, 103


    Nairn, E. W., i. 345, ii. 13, 17, 20, iii. 56, 57, 209

    Napier, Sir A. L. M., Bart., i. 268, 319, 321, ii. 181, 227, 230,
      240, 250, 252, 253, iii. 274

    Napier, R. G. C., ii. 179, 181, 227, 230, 234, iii. 238

    Nash, C. S., M.C., ii. 22, 172, 191, 193, 222, 245, 261, 262, 264,
      286, 302, iii. 35, 36, 37, 48, 279, 290

    Neale, G. D., iii. 17, 22, 241

    Needham, Hon. F. E., i. 12, 34, 35, ii. 157, 171, 191, 193, 194,
      222, 226, 244, iii. 53, 54, 55, 208, 274

    Neill, E. M., M.C., iii. 123, 151, 155, 158, 279, 290

    Nevill, J. H. G., i. 204, iii. 241

    Neville, W. W. S. C., M.C., ii. 11, 169, 187, 189, 210, 211, 212,
      213, 214, 215, 216, iii. 279, 290, 291

    Newey, A. F., ii. 16, 17, 132

    Newton, C. N., M.C., ii. 56, 152, 239, 240, 250, 253, 361, iii.
      274, 290

    Nicholson, J. R., ii. 351, 357, iii. 282

    Nicol, W. E., D.S.O., i. 198, 225, 237, 245, 248, 251, 319, 321,
      iii. 234, 287, 322

    Nivelle, Gen., ii. 164

    Noble, E. H., i. 275, 297, 329, 366

    North, J. B., iii. 209

    Northumberland, Duke of, C.B.E., iii.  292, 294, 322. _See_
      Percy, Earl

    Nugent, G. C., Brig.-Gen., i. 266, iii. 234

    Nugent, G. G. B., i. 13, 299, 339


    O'Brien, Capt. (Irish Guards), iii. 12

    Ogle, H. R., ii. 189, 190, iii. 279

    Oliver, F. R., ii. 192, 194, 222, 245, 286, 305, iii. 279

    Oliver, R. E. H., i. 373, ii. 179, 182

    Oliver, R. M., ii. 227, 231, iii. 26, 79, 83, 87, 90, 238

    Orriss, W, G., ii. 169, 170, 376, 380, iii. 238

    Osborn, W. S., Brig.-Gen., iii. 114

    Osborne, B. R., M.C., ii. 316, 381, iii. 152, 153, 155, 179, 180,
      241, 290

    Osborne, R. B., M.C., iii. 8, 34, 36-7, 122, 141, 144, 147, 279, 290


    Paget, F. E. H., i. 266, 319, 323, 355

    Paget-Cooke, O. D. P., iii. 20, 279

    Pakenham, H. A., Lieut-Col., C.B., C.M.G. (R. Irish Rifles), iii.
      285, 295, 322

    Palmer, Capt., i. 234

    Palmer, R. H. R., M.C., ii. 239, 361, 364, 372, iii. 24, 27, 79,
      123, 124, 152, 153, 179, 181, 290

    Papillon, R. P., iii. 30, 91, 92, 95, 133, 159

    Parker, L. E., i. 246, 248

    Parker, Hon. M. B., iii. 322

    Parker, R. W., i. 341, ii. 1, 3, 6, 169, 171, 187, 189, 373, 375,
      378, iii. 209, 236

    Parker, W., ii. 1

    Parker-Jervis, T., i. 192, 198, 371, 373, 375, ii. 56, 65, iii. 208,
      279

    Parnell, Hon. W. A. D., M.C., i. 282, 298, 329, 337, 338, 339, 366,
      373, ii. 78, 80, 85, iii. 238, 290

    Parry, Capt. (R.A.M.C.), i. 346

    Paton, G. H. T., V.C., M.C., ii. 25, 132, 172, 191, 193, 194, 222,
      245, 286, 289, 302, 306, 309, 310, 313, iii. 236, 284, 290

    Paton, J. A., iii. 24, 25, 80, 83, 90, 279

    Pauling, G. F., M.C., ii. 108, 123, 126, 162, 177, 216, 218, 376,
      377, iii. 238, 290

    Payne, A. F., iii. 113, 282

    Payne-Gallwey, M. H. F., ii. 16, 17, 20, 132, 138, 143, iii. 238

    Payne-Gallwey, Sir W. T., Bart., M.V.O., i. 36, iii. 236

    Paynter, Capt. (Scots Guards), i. 135

    Pearce, N. A., ii. 191, 192, 193, 222, 244, 285, 303, iii. 241

    Pearson, S. H., ii. 186, 240, 250, 331, 334, iii. 241

    Pearson-Gregory, P. J. S., M.C., ii.  150, 162, 164, 175, 177, 218,
      238, 258, 350, 352, iii. 208, 290

    Pelly, P. V., ii. 366, 371, iii. 24, 80, 123, 125, 280, 322

    Pembroke, W. A., ii. 348, 373, 375, iii. 28, 151, 172

    Penfold, A. H., ii. 12

    Penn, A. H., M.C., i. 216, 220, 255, 258, ii. 151, 165, 179, 181,
      227, 240, 328, 331, 360, 367, iii. 23, 79, 81-82, 280, 290, 322

    Penn, E. F., i. 308, 316, 344, 345, 346, iii. 236, 322

    Percy, Earl, iii. 294

    Percy, Lord W. R., D.S.O., i. 190, 198, 226, 231, 244, iii. 274,
      287, 294, 322

    Pereira, G. E., Major-Gen., C.B., C.M.G., D.S.O., i. 368, 376, ii.
      43, 60, 64, 66, 68, 82, 83, 84, 85-86, 153, iii. 272, 285, 293, 322

    Petit, G., Capt. (R.A.M.C.), i. 226, 243, 248, 319, 323, 328-329

    Philipps, G. P., iii. 36, 45, 48, 282

    Phillimore, Rev. S., M.C., ii. 254, 257, 341, 373, iii. 28, 91, 95,
      159, 183, 187-188

    Phillipps, R. W., i. 324, 326, iii. 241

    Pickersgill-Cunliffe, J. R., i. 13, 60, iii. 241

    Pike, E. J. L., M.C., i. 12, 35, 70, 144, 174, 181, iii. 273, 290,
      294, 322

    Pilcher, W. S., D.S.O., i. 87, 119, 128, 130, 246, 248, 319, 323,
      355, 361, ii. 171, 190, 193, 244, 309,  315, 380, 381, 383, iii.
      1, 2, 8, 9, 11, 14, 33, 34, 36, 38, 40, 41, 43, 53, 54, 55, 56,
      196, 287, 294, 322

    Pixley, J. N. F., ii. 171, 191, 193, 194, 222, 223, 225-6, 244, 262,
      264, iii. 236

    Plumer, Sir H., Gen., i. 371

    Poltimore, Lord, Capt. (R. North Devon Yeomanry), iii. 322

    Ponsonby, Hon. B. B., i. 298, 329, 333, 366, 372, iii. 280

    Ponsonby, Hon. C. M. B., M.V.O., i. 88, 126, 130, 307, 308, 309,
      310,  312, 313-14, 315, 318, iii. 235

    Ponsonby, Rt. Hon. Sir F. E. G., K.C.B., K.C.V.O., iii. 322

    Ponsonby, G. A., i. 307, 344, 348, iii. 280

    Ponsonby, J., Major-Gen., i. 284, 287, 295, 301, 303, 304, 305,
      306-7, 368, ii. 84, 106, 271, 272, 288, 289, 303

    Ponsonby, M. H., ii. 17, 360, 363, iii. 81, 83, 84, 85, 90, 238,
      280

    Powell, E. G. H., i. 12, 70, 144, 153, 155-6, 161, 169, 171, 181,
      300, 302, 303, 340, iii. 273, 322

    Powell, J. H., i. 87, 130, iii. 274

    Powney, C. du P. P., iii. 322

    Pryce, T. T., V.C., M.C., ii. 191, 193, 196, 244, 262, 263, 264,
      381, iii. 8, 13, 14, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 41, 42, 44, 45, 46, 47,
      48, 238, 284, 290, 291, 322

    Pulteney, Sir W., Lieut.-Gen., i. 51, 97, 140, ii. 284


    Quilter, J. A. C., i. 86, iii. 235, 322


    Radcliffe, D. J. J., iii. 238

    Ranney, R. van T., ii., 376, 378, iii. 241

    Rasch, G. E. C., D.S.O., i. 87, 124, 127, 128, 130, 135, 138, ii.
      169, 170, 171, 187, 188, 189, 239, 240, 250, 281, 328, 330, 331,
      333, 336, 337, 360, 362, 367, 371, iii. 23, 27, 79, 83, 84, 87,
      89, 151, 210, 287, 294, 322

    Rawlinson, Sir H., Lieut.-Gen., i. 89, 96, 103, 106, 107, 140, 291,
      ii. 144, 146-7, iii. 59, 60

    Rennie, G., i. 88, 125, 127, 130, iii. 236

    Reuter, R. C. G. de, iii. 29, 91, 93, 95, 133, 159, 182

    Rhodes, A. T. G., ii. 236, 238, 258, 261, 315, 318, 320, 321, 323,
      324, 351, iii. 17, 67, 275, 322

    Richardson, R. D., ii. 316, 381, iii. 8, 34, 54, 241

    Riddiford, D. H. S., M.C., i. 361, ii. 162, 175, 177, 238, 258, iii.
      290

    Ridley, Lord (Northumberland Hussars), i. 84

    Ridley, E. D., M.C., i. 40, 69, 76, 78-9, 144, 152, 161, 162, 171,
      176, 181, 201, 203, 206, 216-7, 308, 309, 310, 312, 344, ii. 188,
      189, 242, 338, 340, iii. 275, 290, 322

    Ridley, M. A. T., i. 308, 310, 314, 315, 318, iii. 280

    Ritchie, A. T. A., M.C., i. 288, 299, 303, 304, 305, 306, 378, ii.
      56, 62, 65, 166, 179, 181, 227, 229, 230, 234, iii. 280, 290, 322

    Rocke, Major (Irish Guards), ii. 103, 104, 105

    Rocke, C. O., iii. 67, 70, 72, 241

    Rodney, Hon. C. C. S., ii. 316, 381, iii.  8, 34, 36, 48, 280

    Rolfe, R. H., ii. 165, 176, 178, iii. 8, 34, 54, 239

    Rolinson, J. C., D.C.M., iii. 206, 209, 322

    Romilly, Lieut.-Col. (Scots Guards), ii. 206

    Roper, W. H. S., ii. 190, 242, 254, 257, iii. 241

    Rose, Capt. (Royal Engineers), i.  191

    Rose, I. St. C., O.B.E., i. 143, 144, 150, 155, 181, 221, 255, ii.
      151, 154, 169, iii. 275, 292

    Rowley, C. S., i. 192, 299, 304, 306, iii. 275

    Ruggles-Brise, Sir H. G., Major-Gen., K.C.M.G., C.B., M.V.O., i. 83,
      84, 90, 108, 112, 119, 122, 132, 136, iii. 272, 285, 293, 322

    Rumbold, H. C. L., i. 206, 208, iii. 209, 280

    Russell, Hon. A. V. F., C.M.G., M.V.O., iii. 285, 322

    Russell, G. B. A., iii. 322


    St. Aubyn, F. C., i. 246, 248, 249, 324, 326, ii. 149, 162, iii.
      208, 280

    St. Levan, Lord, Brig.-Gen., C.V.O., C.B., iii. 323

    Saltoun, Lord, C.M.G., iii. 285, 322

    Samuelson, B. G., i. 365, ii. 108, 118, 119, iii. 223, 280

    Sandeman, H. G. W., i. 282, 297, 329, 330, 331, 332, 366, 373, iii.
      322

    Sanderson, H. W., iii. 29

    Sarrail, Gen., i. 354

    Sartorius, E. F. F., i. 199, 226, 231, 244, iii. 236

    Scott, Lord F. G. M. D., D.S.O., i. 76, iii. 273, 287, 294, 322

    Scott-Kerr, R., Brig.-Gen., C.M.G., C.B., D.S.O., M.V.O., i. 19, 20,
      35, iii. 215, 272, 285, 323

    Scott-Russell, O., iii. 58

    Selby-Lowndes, G. W., ii. 286, 380, 383, iii. 8, 34, 55

    Selby-Lowndes, J. W. F., M.C., ii.  26, 132, 138, 142, 159, iii.
      280, 290

    Sergison-Brooke, B. N., Brig.-Gen., C.M.G., D.S.O., ii. 2, 4, 6, 86,
      91, 98, 106, 272, 274, 275, 304, 306, 339, 375, iii. 62, 63, 70,
      94, 167, 273, 286, 287, 294, 323

    Seymour, E., C.B.E., D.S.O., M.V.O., iii. 287, 292, 323

    Seymour, E. W., ii. 151, 165, 242, 254, 373, 375, 376, iii. 280

    Seymour, Lord H. C., Brig.-Gen., D.S.O., i. 212, 217, 220, 245, 255,
      258, 261, 297, 329, 332, 334, 346, 349, ii. 12, 16, 18, 109, 130,
      132, 134, 138, 158, 164, 170, 216, 218, 247, 280, 302, 307, 308,
      320, 322, 354, iii. 1, 273, 287, 294, 323

    Sharp, C. C. T., i. 363, ii. 108, 110, 112, iii. 280

    Sharpe, R. T., ii. 338, 361, 371, iii. 24, 123, 126, 280

    Sheldrake, E. N., iii. 293

    Shelley, E. B., i. 363, ii. 108, 109, iii. 79, 113, 236, 280

    Shelley, G. E., i. 307, 318, ii. 171, iii. 280

    Sheppard, E., D.S.O., M.C., ii. 107, 123, 125, iii. 287, 291, 323

    Sich, G. W., iii. 36, 48, 282

    Siltzer, F. J., ii. 187, 188, 209

    Sim, L. G. E., i. 365, ii. 118, 119, iii. 241

    Simmons, P. G., M.C., ii. 165, 176, 177, 219, 238, 258, 350, iii.
      17, 291

    Simpson, J. H. C., M.C., iii. 55, 79, 113, 115, 116, 119, 120, 141,
      142, 144, 147, 275, 291

    Singh, Sir Pertab, Major-Gen., i. 191

    Sitwell, F. O. S., i. 192, 198, 297, 329, 345, ii. 13, 17, iii. 208

    Skidmore, J. H., i. 12, 144, 201, 206

    Skinner, L. P., 2nd Lieut., M.C. (Guards Machine Gun Regiment), iii.
      291

    Sloane-Stanley, G. C., i. 345, ii. 13, 17, 172, 191, 193, 244, 261,
      381, iii. 8, 13, 14, 34, 209

    Sloane-Stanley, H. H., M.C., i. 346, ii. 12, 17, 20, 22, 23, 245,
      262, 263, 285, 302, 306, 309, 310, 314, 315, 380, iii. 8, 13, 34,
      35, 36, 42, 47, 48, 209, 236, 291

    Smith, Capt. (Tank Corps), iii. 96

    Smith, D. A., M.C., i. 208, 220, 255, 279, 297, 329, 366, iii. 280,
      291, 322

    Smith, D. E., iii. 280

    Smith, H. I'B., iii. 133, 159, 163

    Smith, M. B., ii. 49, 73, 74-5

    Smith, O. M., ii. 325, 361, 364,
    367, 368, 369, 371, iii. 24, 79, 83, 84, 86, 90, 275

    Smith, O. W. D., iii. 18, 23, 282

    Smith, T., ii. 179

    Smith, W. R. A., C.M.G., i. 75, 76, 144, 148, 152, 153, 154, 155,
      156, 157, 159, 160, 163, 166, 169, 173, 174, 178, 183, 184, 185,
      197, 201, 204, 206, 210, 218, 219, 220, 255, 257-8, 261, 272, 336,
      iii. 234, 286

    Smith-Dorrien, Sir Horace, Gen., i. 11, 15, 24, 29, 97, 111

    Smuts, J. C., Gen., i. 353, 354

    Snelling, A. G., iii. 56, 57

    Somerset, N. A. H., i. 88, 113, 114, 130, iii. 241

    Sordet, Gen., i. 24

    Spence, P. M., M.C., i. 361, ii. 123, 126, 162, 176, 177, 218, 237,
      238, 315, 318, 320, 322, 323, iii. 122, 141, 142, 143, 147, 171,
      172, 175, 291

    Spencer-Churchill, E. G., M.C., i. 205, ii. 26, 130, 131, 132, 134,
      136-7, 137-8, 143, 157, 172, 191, iii. 93, 94, 275, 291, 323

    Stainton, W. A., ii. 11, 87, 103, 107, iii. 239

    Stanhope, Earl, D.S.O., M.C., i. 190, 198, 199, iii. 287, 291, 323

    Stanhope, Hon. R. P., i. 341, ii. 1, 5, 6, 87, 103, 107, iii. 208,
      236

    Stanley, Hon. F. C., Brig.-Gen., C.M.G., D.S.O., iii. 286, 294, 295,
      323

    Stanley, Lord, M.C., i. 245, 248, 269, 270, 319, 323, 326, 355, 361,
      iii. 275, 291

    Stein, O. F., D.S.O., ii. 108, 110, 111, 112, 163, 176, 177, 219,
      258, 350, 353, 354, 359, iii. 18, 22, 280, 287, 323

    Stephen, D. C. L., i. 12, 26, 47-8, 50, iii. 236

    Stephenson, P. K., i. 218, 248, 319, 323, iii. 280

    Stepney, H., Major (Irish Guards), i. 49

    Stewart, E. O., i. 192, 341, ii. 150, 157, 165, 193, iii. 208

    Stewart, H. W., iii. 241, 282

    Stewart, W. A. L., i. 65, 72, ii. 7, 130, 132, 134, 138, 139, 143,
      iii. 208, 236, 291

    Stirling, Lieut.-Col. (Scots Guards), iii. 168, 175

    Stirling, E. G., iii. 280

    Stocks, M. G., i. 12, 38, 144, 171, 181, iii. 239

    Stopford, Gen., i. 287

    Stourton, R. H. P. J., i. 359, 362, ii. 108, 113, 280

    Stratford, H. D., ii. 240, 250, 253, iii. 36, 48, 239

    Streatfeild, Sir H., K.C.V.O., C.B., C.M.G., i. 183, 194, 210, 245,
      268, 286, 288, ii. 149, 154, 158, iii. 78, 218, 224, 230, 233,
      286, 323

    Streatfield, H. S. J., D.S.O., iii. 287, 323

    Stucley, H. St. L., i. 87, 116, 124, 126, 129, iii. 235, 323

    Sutton, K. H. M., iii. 280

    Swaine, F. L. V., i. 246, 248, 250, 251, 319, 323, 355, iii. 323

    Swaine, Y. W., iii. 280

    Swift, C. T., i. 356, 362, ii. 123, 125, iii. 280, 323

    Sykes, C. A. V., i. 141

    Symes-Thompson, C., i. 12, 40, 59, 76, 144, 178, 181, iii. 236

    Symons, T. E. R., i. 88, 96, iii. 294, 323


    Tabor, J., ii. 166, 179, 182, 241, 250, 253, iii. 280

    Tate, E. D., ii. 242, 373, 375, 378, iii. 280

    Taylor, G. P. du Plat, O.B.E., iii. 208, 292

    Taylor, E. R., iii. 208

    Teece, J., M.C., i. 87, 138, 193, 225, 248, 323, 355, 361, ii. 162,
      175, 177, 238, 350, 354, iii. 17, 67, 171, 282, 291, 295, 323

    Tennant, Hon. E. W., i. 308, 344, ii. 13, 17, 137, 143, iii. 239

    Terrell, R., ii. 166, 167, iii. 281

    Tetley, J. C. D., ii. 187, 189, 242, 254, 255, 257, iii. 239

    Thomas, M. D., i. 364, ii. 382, iii. 8, 34, 36, 37, 48, 281

    Thomas, O. C. (Machine Gun Company), iii. 239

    Thorne, A. F. A. N., C.M.G., D.S.O., i. 359, 360, 361, ii. 120, 169,
      171, 187, 189, 209, 214, 229, 242, 254, 306, 340, 341, 344, 345,
      346, 372, 373, 375, 376, iii. 28, 29, 30, 90, 95, 98, 99, 126-7,
      286, 287, 288, 323

    Thorne, T. F. J. N., i. 288, 307, 310, 313, 314, 315, 318, iii. 226,
      237

    Thornhill, N., M.C., ii. 187, 189, 242, 254, 257, iii. 281, 291

    Thoseby, J. N. L., Capt. (R.A.M.C.), ii. 169, 187

    Thrupp, M., ii. 7, 8, 87, 103, 107, 163, 177, 218, 219, iii. 241

    Thynne, Sir R., Major-Gen., i. 194, iii. 216, 218, 219, 223

    Timmis, W. U., ii. 237, 238, 318, 350, 357, iii. 281

    Tindal-Atkinson, J. F., ii. 237, 238, 258, 350, iii. 18, 20, 281

    Tisdall, Capt. (Irish Guards), i. 36 (_note_)

    Tompson, A. H., i. 308, 316, 318, iii. 241

    Tompson, R. F. C., ii. 130, iii. 239

    Topham, D. B., ii. 317

    Towneley-Bertie, Hon. M. H. E. C., i. 373, iii. 30, 281

    Townshend, Gen., i. 354

    Trench, R. P. le P., M.C., i. 248, 319, 323, 325-6, 364, ii. 108,
      123, 162, 175, 178, 238, 258, 350, iii. 55, 275, 291, 323

    Trotter, E. H., D.S.O., iii. 234, 323

    Trotter, G. F., Brig.-Gen., C.B., C.M.G., C.B.E., D.S.O., M.V.O.,
      i. 191, 197, 225, 234, 235-6, 243, 244, 245, 248, 252, 269, 270,
      319, 320, 323, 324, 325, 355, 357, 370, iii. 272, 285, 286, 292,
      294, 323

    Tryon, G. C., M.P., iii. 294, 323

    Tuckwell, E. H., M.C., ii. 158, 171, 191, 193, 222, 244, 262, 285,
      302, 381, iii. 8, 34, 55, 291

    Tudway, H. R. C., i. 171, 181, iii. 239

    Tufnell, C. W., i. 144, 166, 167, 181, iii. 239

    Tufnell, N. C., ii. 348, 373, iii. 91, 95, 96, 97

    Turner, C. R., i. 355, iii. 323


    Van Neck, P., i. 88, 118, 120, 130, iii. 239

    Vaughan, E. N. E. M., D.S.O., i. 342, 373, ii. 1, 6, 108, 109, 110,
      111, 112, 162, 175, iii. 206, 208, 287, 323

    Veitch, J. J. M., ii. 192, 193, 222, 309, 311, iii. 281

    Venables, Rev. C., iii. 115, 141, 147, 172

    Venables, Rev. J. O., iii. 113

    Vereker, G. G. M., M.C., i. 366,
    373, ii. 165, 179, 240, 360, iii. 24, 27, 79, 291, 323

    Vereker, R. H. M., i. 13, 28, iii. 242

    Verelst, Capt. (Coldstream Guards), ii. 82

    Vernon, H. B., M.C., ii. 164, 351, 360, iii. 18, 67, 70, 71, 74,
      281, 291

    Vernon, H. D., i. 300, iii. 239

    Viand, Lieut. (Coldstream Guards), iii. 202

    Villiers, G. J. T. H., i. 268, 319, 321, iii. 281

    Vivian, G. N., O.B.E., i. 299, 303, 304, 306, iii. 275, 292, 323

    Vivian, V., C.M.G., D.S.O., M.V.O., iii. 273, 286, 287, 294, 323


    Wakeman, E. O. R., i. 246, 248, 251, iii. 242, 323

    Wakeman, O., i. 248, 319, 323, 324, 325, iii. 275

    Wales, H.R.H. the Prince of, K.G., G.C.M.G., G.B.E., M.C., i. 191,
      193, 208, 219-20, 245, 269, 273, 278, 356, iii. 195, 197, 225,
      285, 291, 292, 323

    Walker, Gen., ii. 308

    Walker, C. F. A., M.C., i. 12, 63, 299, 303, 304, 306, 339, 341, ii.
      151, 165, 179, 181, 184, 227, 239, 380, 381, iii. 33, 55, 151,
      153, 154, 155, 179, 275, 291, 324

    Walker, Sir H. B., Major-Gen., K.C.B., D.S.O., iii. 50

    Walker, P. M., M.C., i. 341, 373, ii. 56, 169, iii. 209, 281, 291

    Wall, G. H., M.C., i. 299, 339, ii. 1, 6, 169, 187, 188, 242, iii.
      28, 91, 291, 324

    Wall, L. E. G., iii. 147

    Wall, R. B. St. Q., ii. 165, 238

    Wall, V. A. N., ii. 258, 325, 350

    Walter, S., i. 88, 113, 114, 130, iii. 242

    Ward, E. S., i. 141, 191, ii. 6, iii. 208, 275

    Wardrop, Brig.-Gen., i. 368

    Warner, A. A. J., iii. 67, 71, 74, 242

    Warner, E. C., i. 360, ii. 117, 122

    Warren, Capt. (Border Regiment), i. 135

    Watts, H., Brig.-Gen., C.B., i. 83, 90, 111

    Warrender, H. V., D.S.O., iii. 287, 324

    Wearne, W. R., iii. 56, 57

    Webber, R. L., ii. 360, iii. 18, 67, 71, 74, 281

    Webster, Sir A. F. W. E., Bart., O.B.E., iii. 208, 292, 324

    Webster, G. V. G. A., ii. 189, 190, 241, iii. 242

    Welby, R. W. G., i. 12, 62, 70, iii. 239, 324

    Weld-Forester, Hon. A. O. W. C., M.V.O., i. 87, 104, 119, 120, 121,
      126, 129, iii. 235, 324

    Wellesley, Lord G., Capt., M.C. (R.A.F.), iii. 324

    Wellesley, Lord R., i. 88, 95, 105, 126, 130, iii. 237, 291

    Wells, P. H., Capt. (R.A.M.C.), ii. 236, 238, 317

    West, R. G., M.C., ii. 192, 193, 222, 244, iii. 91, 95, 100, 281,
      291

    Westmacott, Brig.-Gen., i. 176

    Westmacott, G. R., D.S.O., i. 192, 198, 226, 231, 233, 234, 236,
      237, 238, 239-40, 243, 244, ii. 186, 241, 250, 253, 331, 333, 335,
      336, 361, iii. 208, 281, 287, 324

    White, G. D., iii. 206, 208, 209, 294, 324

    White, H., ii. 239, 240, 250, 361, iii. 24, 79, 83, 87, 90, 242, 324

    Whitehead, A. O., ii. 87, 98, 107, iii. 223, 281

    Wiggins, A. F. R., i. 221, 297, 329, 366, 373, 374-5, 376, ii. 52,
      iii. 28, 91, 324

    Wiggins, H. G., M.C., ii. 78, 80, 85, 317, 318, 323, iii. 55, 57,
      281, 291

    Wigram, C., i. 245, 288

    Wilkinson, C., i. 328, 355, 358, ii. 149, 162, 163, 176, 237, iii.
      281

    Williams, A., ii. 170, 179, iii. 212, 213

    Williams, E. G., i. 206, 221, 255, 279, iii. 239

    Williams, H. St. J., ii. 12, 87, 98, 107, iii. 28, 281

    Williams, M. G., i. 204, 206, 307, 311, 314-15, 317, 318, 344, ii.
      158, 191, iii. 208, 294, 324

    Williams, R., i. 190, 195-6, 299, 340, iii. 242

    Williams-Bulkeley, R. G. W., M.C., iii. 324

    Willoughby, Hon. C., Lieut.-Col. (Tank Corps), ii. 280

    Wilson, G., Col. (Household Cavalry), i. 167-8

    Wilson, G. B., M.C., i. 328, 355, 359, ii. 338, 360, 367, 369, 370,
      iii. 151, 153, 155, 156, 275, 291

    Wilson, H. M., ii. 166, 179, 181, 227, 240

    Wilton, J. D. C., ii. 151, iii. 281

    Windeler, H. W., ii. 192, 193, 222, 244, 262, 286, 305, iii. 226,
      242

    Windram, R., iii. 324

    Wolrige-Gordon, R., M.C., i. 12, 268, 323, 340, ii. 1, 5, 7, 87, 99,
      100, iii. 18, 56, 57, 67, 71, 74, 75, 77, 275, 291

    Wood, Lieut.-Col. (Border Regiment), i. 238, 249

    Worsley, E. G., i. 343, ii. 107, iii. 242

    Worsley, J. F., ii. 1, 6, 7, 87, 98, 107, 187, 189, 210, 215, 254,
      340, 343, iii. 209, 239

    Wright, R. B. B., ii. 78, 85, iii. 281

    Wrixon, M. P. B., M.C., ii. 191, 382, iii. 3-4, 55, 56, 57, 281,
      291

    Wynne, E. H. J., i. 299, 339, ii. 1, 6, 87, 97-8, 107, iii. 239


    Yorke, Hon. A. E. F., ii. 1, 6, iii. 209

    Yorke, B. E., i. 343


                                THE END


           _Printed by_ R. & R. CLARK, LIMITED, _Edinburgh_.
